Simon.
Hi.
Good morning, Simon. Good morning. Okay,
Well, we are live, uh, we are here on the, uh,
education training system, reform amendment bill,
and we have first early childhood council.
You have 10 minutes as an organization. The time is yours.
Uh, it includes time for questions, so bear
that in mind over you,
Koho, and thank you for seeing me again.
It's, um, great to come back as these EC reforms are going
through, and I think there's something to be said
for checking back in with the stakeholders
because there are so many, uh,
different strings to the reforms.
So my remarks today are mainly gonna focus on the bit
that has been added to this bill.
Not really going to talk about, uh, the private schools
aspects or what's actually in the actual bill.
We haven't seen the detail of the amendment
that will come into the bill.
Um, but what is important for early childhood is the shift
of the director of regulation from the Ministry
of Education reporting to the secretary, shifting that
to the Education Review Office.
That's what's most important to us.
And it's something we submitted on previously
and talked to you about previously
because it was created in the ministry,
and we thought that was, um, not the right way to go,
and now it's being shifted to
where we think is the right way to go.
So, just a brief introduction about us.
Um, the Early Childhood Council is the largest, uh,
association for employers in the early childhood sector,
but we only represent the center-based education
and care services.
So we don't represent play center
or kindergartens, um, or Ang.
So there's a really rich, vibrant diversity in the sector.
Uh, but we are an NGO.
We are not, um, a private business lobby group at all.
We, anyone can join us
and 70% of our members, yes, they're private companies,
but 70% of the sector private companies in our sector,
and 30% are community-based providers.
So little, um, community groups like that.
Um, Tata Childcare Center, um,
that we recently advocated for.
Uh, so to the, to the, to the bill, we were really, we,
we are really happy with how things are going.
So there has been some progress, um,
with the criteria changing.
So now the rubber is hitting the road
and we can see that the government changes are improving
child safety, reducing, um, admin burden.
And it's actually actually making a difference.
So some of the changes are starting to filter through now.
So that's really promising, but we will remain vigilant
because from a provider point of view,
we rely on the regulations to keep it safe,
to keep it a credible industry,
to protect the lifeblood of the entire industry.
Nobody wants that to be undermined
in the director of regulation changes in this bill.
What we are, we are starting
to get a little concerned about is what will happen when the
director of regulation is working in Arrow,
and Arrow is doing its review function.
So one of the recommended recommendations in our submission
is to put something in the legislation to keep
a proper separation between review function and regulation.
There's nothing in there at the moment,
and the danger that we see happening is review officers
getting confused between their different hats.
You could, it could be quite chaotic
and inconsistent in the sense that you're going
through an education review.
Suddenly they find something
and you're, you're dealing with a regulatory intervention
that will be quite, if that does happen,
and it could happen at the moment
because there's nothing to prevent it, uh,
that could really, um, scuttle some of the benefits
of this, um, change.
So I would suggest there is some protection added.
What we saw in the cabinet paper
that the government looked at that
and thought it was important,
but there's nothing in the law to actually make that happen.
Perhaps we are missing something,
but we saw that as important.
Uh, the other thing is we've been talking
to our members a lot in the recent months,
and they're starting to get concerned about the change
to aero.
And part of that reason is there are some excellent
education, um, regulator staff in the regions.
Obviously it's mixed,
but there's a lot of institutional knowledge.
There's nothing in the bill that we can see to transfer
employees from the ministry to ERO.
Sometimes you do that when you're building a new function
because you want to, you don't wanna lose all
your, your good.
I strongly suggest you consider allowing that to happen so
that you know, valuable institutional knowledge isn't lost.
Um, uh, the other thing I'd like to mention,
and then I could do some questions, um, is
around the changeover itself.
Again, there's nothing around transition
period or grace period.
When you switch regulator, even if you get everything right,
there's gonna be, there's gonna be some bumps in the road.
There's gonna be an adjustment period.
It's really important to start off the right way.
If there's anything you can do to create, um, a bit of a
a a grace period really where you, where people get a chance
to adapt to the new, the new regime, that would be good.
From my point of view, um, the members are,
but when they don't know what to expect, they get very, um,
concerned because there's nothing, you know,
they worry, they worry.
So, um, something like
that would just provide a really good, um, backstop up.
Um, and I think in terms of, the only other thing I'd like
to say about the bill is, um, with the ITE moving
with the standard setting, moving to the ministry,
we would broadly support something being done
around the standard of initial teacher education.
We do see the teacher starting and not being prepared.
We agree there's a problem whether
or not that's the right solution, we are open-minded,
but something definitely needs to be done.
So broadly we support that, that aspect
of the broader bill as well.
Great. Is that it for Yes.
Thank you very much and very helpful information.
We have one question so far from Lawrence Dunan.
Thank you Chair. Um, happy New Year to all.
Um, now I think first of all,
because currently we haven't seen the exact amendment
paper that's gonna be introduced.
It is still, it's, it's a bit weird.
Um, I think unconventional, um, to ask for submissions
and feedback when we, like you said,
we haven't really seen the detail of it yet,
but based on what has, uh, been, I wanted to check
with you in terms of your submission.
Why do you think Eero is a better option
than Ministry of Education?
When it comes to regulatory function,
We don't really think they're a better option.
We, we see pragmatically, you can't have two regulators,
so you've got to choose one or the other.
And there are pros and cons, no matter which one you chose.
By choosing Aero, you, they, you've chosen an agency
that has been quite consistent with their,
the way they've done their work.
Whereas what we've seen with the ministry is there is
a different approach in every region.
And so if you are trying to achieve consistency, these guys,
they've delivered consistency before.
They'll deliver consistency again, one
Sub. What would be some of
the cons of transferring to Euro
Cons? Yeah.
'cause you said there are cons and cons for both.
Well, we, we are really worried we're gonna lose some
of these valuable relationships with the ministry staff.
Mm-hmm. Early childhood, almost everybody.
They're, they're people. People, yeah.
They're not bureaucrats, they're not administrators.
So some of them have forged really close relationships
with the ministry staff
and they really don't want to lose those.
Um, 'cause that, like, for example, up in Gisborne,
it's incredible what the ministry
ministry office has been able to achieve up there
where you can really see a partnership between, you know,
the sector steward and, and the actual industry.
And they're working together exactly
how the model is meant to work.
That's not what you see in Auckland,
you know, in different regions.
Again, you see some failures as well,
but it's not all positives positive.
Yeah. Thank you. And yeah, thank you.
Uh, can you please elaborate your point?
You're making your submission about safety,
checking on children's workers, you talk about duplication
and that, so what kind
of workers are you thinking there? Yeah, yeah,
That's a really good question.
The safety checking looks does look like a mistake in,
in what's happening from our perspective
because, uh, safety checking comes from the Children's Act
and the Ministry of Education is the administering body
for the safety checking regime.
And that isn't changing.
But in the early childhood regulations,
safety checking has been brought in to the governance
and management criteria.
So it's caught under an umbrella of the,
of the ECE regulations.
So, so we've actually set up a conflict then
because we're transferring back to Eero.
So Eero will be checking safety,
checking whilst the ministry's responsible for it,
that can't possibly be correct,
that it's not right.
Cheapest. Thank you. Thank you very much.
And thank you so much for your time, Simon.
We appreciate you coming in, uh,
submitting in a very comprehensive submission. Thank
You. Thank you.
Thanks. Yeah.
Next we have Kindergartens, roa, uh,
so we've got Amanda.
Oh, wonderful. Thank you.
We have 10 minutes of time for you,
and as you've probably heard, that includes time
for questions, how you utilize it. Thank you.
Ra ua. Um, so my name's Amanda Olston.
I'm representing kindergarten.
So we're a national collective
of community based not-for-profit
regional kindergarten associations.
I'm the chief executive of Whanau Meki, which is one
of the members of the collective.
Um, I'd like to introduce my colleagues, Glenda Row,
who's our HR advisor, professional practice,
and Colleen Templeton,
who is a senior head teacher at Island Bay
kindergarten here in Wellington.
Uh, kindergarten alter kindergarten ca caters
for over 12,000 children around the country.
And we, um, employ, uh,
over 1500 qualified teachers as well as, uh,
another thousand support staff.
Um, and as you all know, kindergarten has been a cornerstone
of early childhood education in
for over 150 years.
The intent of the bill adds to a number
of changes over this past year
or so, as the previous presenter has said.
Um, and these changes we believe have been rushed through
and taken together, undermined,
erode public education, we can regulation
and accountability, politicized education and teaching
and undermine the teaching profession.
All of these changes were made with little or no research
or evidence to contribute to their efficacy.
We are alarmed
and deeply concerned about the rushed nature of the changes
and the impact they will have on Tam Wau,
um, and our communities
and the, um, teaching profession now and in the future.
So you would've seen in our written submission that we, um,
urge the committee to reject the amendments
regarding shifting the functions from the teaching council
to the Ministry of Education,
reject establishing the director
of regulation role within the Education Review office,
seek clarity around the primary purpose
of the new property agency, its powers and functions
and its obligations to the public,
and advocate for public community-based provision
of early childhood education in schools
to remain the priority for, uh,
a property agency when determining the use
of public property.
So we'd like to make some key points on each
of these recommendations,
and then we'd be really happy to answer any questions.
So I'm gonna speak about the
shifting functions from the Teaching Council
to the Ministry of Education.
First, uh, the, this bill undermines the independence
of teachers' professional body
and ignores the experience, expertise,
and professionalism of the 110,000 plus teachers,
educating our tamari
and Ranga tahi et set to the dangerous president,
exposing initial teacher education
and teacher professionalism
and practice to the political ideology of the day,
rather than it being based on sound research
standards for the teaching profession will lose
political neutrality.
No other professional organization is subjected
to this level of interference by the crown
and specifically by a government minister.
There is no evidence
that shifting the functions will improve,
teach initial teacher education,
and the ministry simply does not have the capacity
or capability to take on that role.
The previous national government had, um, worked
at having a pathway across the whole education sector from
early childhood through to tertiary,
and that was comprehensive,
and that is what's being changed.
But I had also like to address the establishment
of a new agency to over oversee school property.
We are concerned that the commercial discipline,
the minister hopes the New Zealand Property Agency will
bring to its role risk.
The viability of services that is charging commercial rates
for leases would place con
considerable financial pressure on communities,
schools in early childhood services
who don't own their property.
The ministry has no clear policy on its property portfolio,
although nationally communicate commun, uh,
community-based early childhood services hold some hundreds
of leases and property occupancy
documents with the ministry.
This has created complexity in relation to CapEx expenditure
as opposed to repairs
and maintenance obtaining equity from the ministry when a
service is closed and the lean
and building is to be handled back to handed back
to the ministry and
or dealing with the aftermath of natural disasters such
as earthquakes and flooding.
Despite the complexities of the current processes,
we expect the agency to honor existing, uh, arrangements
as the, um, largest nonprofit provider
of early childhood education.
And means that we would not be financially able
to operate if we were paying in commercial
rates for property.
Uh, we, I'll also address the director
of regulation moving into the Education Review office,
although not part of the bill that's late consideration is
alarming the proposal for the role to shift
to ERO signals the government is willing
to distance early childhood education from the Ministry
of Education, implying its only interest is in regulatory
compliance rather than the public good
of high quality early childhood education.
Further, we are deeply concerned about the role
of the ECE Director of regulation.
Given the powers are extensive
and insufficiently constrained,
it is unclear whether the role will be merged into the
director role or role proposed in this bill.
And in closing, we would like
to make a comment about charter schools
where our national curricula and qualified
and registered teachers are optional.
And the concept undermines the notion of public education
provided equitably across our communities.
Hmm. We urge caution
about allowing one operator owning multiple services
given our sector's experience with large providers,
many backed by international equity companies,
and expand as a result of the acquisition of independent
and community-based services.
This creates potential
to exert undue influence on policy settings.
It is also evident in research that in bid
to minimize expenses
and maximize profit operators work to minimal standards
and argue greater flexibility.
This approach serves the interests of the owners
and the shareholders not of tamari ran
or long-term interest of our communities in wider society
or education system.
The, uh, the, uh, points that were made
by the early childhood council around their concerns around,
um, the monitoring function, moving from the ministry
to the, to ero, uh, really to support our argument
that actually it should remain with the ministry.
That being the potential loss of, um, of knowledge.
And also the confusion between the, the role
of the review office as a, as an education function as well,
and the monitoring function.
So we are really concerned about that.
The significance of the changes
proposed in the bill are profound and far reaching,
and now based on untested assumptions with little
or no evidence to justify such a significant overhaul of
art's education system.
Mm-hmm. And that's what we are really,
really concerned about.
Um, so thank you for giving us this time.
Na mehi, we are happy to take questions.
Right. We've got time for one very quick
question. Lawrence, you put your hand up
First. Thank you. Um,
just in terms of what you said with
shifting from MOE to E, you're talking about shifting,
looking at just purely regulatory in as opposed
to as a public good.
Do you think the shift would also potentially encourage
further privatization of the EC
Sector? Definitely.
All of the initiatives, virtually all
of the initiatives in recent regulatory changes, um, changes
to legislation, previous changes to the Education
and Training Act are all about privileging private providers
and the privatization of, um, not only, um,
the continued privatization of early childhood education,
but the privatization
and commercialization of our schooling system,
which is a huge concern
and which is the thing that will happen with charter schools
and the allowance for corporates to come into the,
um, schooling system.
Thank you very much, and thank you for your submission.
Thank you. Your time.
We now have a submission from Eliza,
but, uh, Eliza, we have you down as an individual submitter,
so we have five minutes of time for you.
That is correct. And you can take your submissions for,
but I would like to acknowledge my supporters who come,
um, to back me today.
So though I do speak as an individual, I speak
with the support of my au uh, my church, my school,
Wellton College, and my ku.
So though we have been disestablished, we are 11 schools
who remain committed to one another.
Um, so, uh, morning Koto, thank you very much
for hearing me this morning.
I really appreciate
and value being part of this crucial, uh,
democratic process.
And I speak with the experience of a,
an experienced secondary school teacher as a mother, uh,
a former play center educator,
and a former, uh, chair
of my children's primary school board.
Um, I want to acknowledge that I don't oppose all
of the changes that the government has made recently in
education, and I acknowledge that is a need for change.
Um, but essentially my message is that this bill
makes, uh, education in New Zealand more politicized.
And essentially I think that it needs
to be less politicized.
And that is the key message
and direction that I would like to challenge.
Um, and of course, I don't have the expertise
of your earlier submitters, the legal backing, et cetera,
but from my reading
and understanding, this bill concentrates more power in the
hands of the minister and changes the balance of power
of the teaching council so that it becomes, in the words
of Sir Jeffrey Palmer, an instrument of the government
rather than an independent professional body education, um,
is already a political football.
We experience extreme pendulum swings in education.
Um, you know, examples are the move from whole language to,
uh, sorry, from phonics to whole language
and now back to structured literacy
that may in itself be a good thing.
But now we seem to be sort
of moving towards structured everything.
We move from, um, student lead
and 21st century schools to knowledge rich
and highly prescriptive facts.
And these extreme swings don't actually benefit students
or teachers or families.
Um, and I think that the truth is that the best path
of often lies somewhere in
between these extremes rather than at these extreme ends
of the pendulum swing.
And I credit, um, professor Brolin wood, um,
I've developed my thinking in,
in conjunction in discussion with her on this topic.
I would also add that changes
that often seem like common sense can have striking
downsides that wouldn't necessarily be evident
to someone who's not an expert or experienced in the sector.
Um, PI state's assessment would be an example.
I also want to emphasize that the view that we
as teachers have is different from a political view.
We have a longer term view.
We see the in the classroom realities.
And it, our view is more holistic
because we are working with students, not just numbers.
The statistics do matter,
but, uh, we work with the
individual students in front of us.
I have an example from 1930 that I think demonstrates that
teachers' bodies can have a longer term view.
So in 1930, the teachers federation attempted
to introduce tare into the school curriculum,
but their plan was blocked by the director of Education, uh,
who argued that the natural abandonment
of the native tongue involve no loss to Maori.
So, uh, what would I like to see?
Uh, firstly, I would like to see that
decisions about education are made in meaningful
consultation with the sector,
and that they are robustly informed
by a range of expert voices.
Um, I think it's critical
that decisions are not made on the basis
of ideological positions, narrow consultation
or from thin knowledge.
Um, curriculum in particular is,
is a technical area requiring specific expertise.
Uh, and although we might all as parents or politicians
or citizens have a view on curriculum, you know,
there are experts in this technical area.
Secondly, it, you know, in my dream for New Zealand,
we would have a cross party body
that plans long term for education.
Um, curriculum, for example, could be reviewed on a 10
or 15 year cycle rather than an ad hoc way,
governed by political whims.
And I endorse the RO educators
collective comment in their submission.
They recommend a more durable cross party
and sector informed mechanism for curriculum stewardship
to ensure curriculum development remains evidence informed,
treaty aligned and insulated from political cycles.
And three, I would like the teaching council to, uh,
for elected teachers to retain
the majority on the teaching council.
Um, so, you know, education is so important to our nation.
It reflects our values and our culture and our aspirations,
but it also influences them.
It's a long term goal, it's a long term project for us all.
And I also acknowledge we
as teachers don't get it right 100% of the time either.
So I think it's critically important that we work together
for the benefit of all of our children and for our future.
And that's it from me. I hope you might have some questions.
Thank you, Eliza. We've actually run out of time
with you this morning, but that was a wonderful submission.
We do appreciate your time. Okay.
And the fact that you've brought
all your support from board.
Thank you very much.
Next we have Chris Abercrombie. Thanks.
Yeah, That was great. Um, we have you as an individual.
I hope that wasn't a mistake.
Oh, I did clarify that,
and they said I wasn't here as an individual. Okay,
Great. Well, we've got five
minutes of time with you,
and as you heard, include time for questions.
Uh, Koto and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, I'm here to strongly oppose education training
system review amendment bill.
In my experience, education thrives when it is
collaborative, evidence-based
and deeply connected to local communities.
This bill shifts us away from that by centralizing power
and reducing the voice of educators,
school communities, iwi and whanau.
I want to address the proposed changes to the curriculum.
The bill gives the minister to the ability
to set highly prescriptive curriculum statements without
meaningful consultation.
I've seen the power of local flexibility
and action, action, especially in schools,
work closely with iwi.
These partnerships allow programs
to reflect local tikanga histories and aspirations.
They create genuine engagement for
if this bill passes those locally responsive approaches.
Risk being replaced by one size fits all directives from
Wellington that undermines the 2D obligations
and makes it much harder for schools
to deliver culturally responsive learning
that reflects the communities they serve.
The constant review of amendment
of curriculum settings is a major concern.
Teachers already experience a high experience significant
strain when policy changes disrupt long-term planning.
I've lived through major curriculum shifts,
I think this is my fourth, and know the instability.
They create frequent changes, increase compliance work,
reduce clarity, and ultimately take teachers away from
innovation and from their learners without proper systems
and resourcing, these reforms will make the curriculum less
manageable and harder for teachers, parents,
and students to understand this,
bill risks devaluing teachers as curriculum designers.
Teachers are experts in their fields.
They know their learners, their communities,
and what engagement looks like.
When you narrow teacher discretion
by just prescribing content from the center,
you reduce professional autonomy and creativity.
We know that when teachers are trusted to design, learning
for their context will thrive.
The bill shifts teachers towards compliance instead
of innovation, and that's not what our system needs.
We must consider the bill's impact on Lia.
Local flexibility is essential for schools
to embed local tikanga and iwi priorities.
Centralizing curriculum decisions makes
that work harder, not easier.
I've personally seen how strong iwi partnerships strengthen
identity and belonging for students.
Prescriptive national requirements risk weakening those
relationships and reducing the visibility
of the in everyday practice.
Finally, the systematic risks of this bill is significant
terms like schools
of serious concern are vague and undefined.
Without clear criteria, decisions could become arbitrary,
including forced conversions to charter school status.
There is no evidence
that expanding charter school model will improve equity
and no indication the ministry has the capacity
or the resources to manage additional
oversights oversight powers.
Effectively, the bill represents an unprecedented
politicalization of education.
It erodes professional autonomy, reduces sector voice,
and undermines our ability to deliver inclusive,
culturally grounded community driven learning.
I urge the committee to reject the bill
and has said work in genuine partnership with educators,
iwi, communities and learners
to strengthen our system in a way that honor the Titi
and support the diverse needs
of our across our channel. Thank you.
Bye. Thank you, Chris. Um, wonderfully timed.
You've allowed time for questions.
We've got one from Lawrence bi and in
Thank you chair. Um,
thank you for coming, Chris. Um, happy New Year.
Can I just check in terms of the curriculums, um, aspect,
we're advised that
what is happening in this bill is something
that is just codifying existing practice.
But do you see an issue with that being codified?
And I'm guessing that the part that you are have alarmed,
you know, the, the, the part that
that alarms you is the part that may exercise the power.
The minister may exercise the power though,
not secretary has to review the curriculum
statement or reported.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. But what, I mean, it is
not codified right now,
but it's something that could take place currently.
Right? Well,
It, it can in a sense because,
but the minister removes things like they already did
that the NLPs they removed in
previous amendments, et cetera.
So this has sort of being more power to the minister to say,
this is what I want the curriculum to be in a sense.
Uh, and so,
and you know, any government I don't think should have
that power, uh, to be able to say one person to be able
to say, this is what the curriculum should be.
Yeah. Uh, bypassing subject associations, bypassing, uh,
unions, bypassing teachers, bypassing communities,
and having real central control from Wellington by saying,
this is what your school in, in cargo
where I'm from should be doing.
Mm. And I worry that it's gonna lose local flavor.
So for instance, the cargo, we've got the smelter
that's heavily involved in our, uh, community.
When I taught in Bullah in Westport, we had mining
as a big aspect of our school.
When I taught in CRM college,
we had Vivi culture as a big aspect.
By having those centralization,
those could effectively disappear.
Thank you. Uh,
and Willa Jean, a quick question if you can. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, I just note in your conclusion,
you talked about this being the unprecedented politicization
of education and you urge genuine consultation.
What has your experience been of the consultation
around this bill and the proposed changes
in terms of curriculum?
Um, very poor in a lot of aspects.
Uh, the previous submitter talked about a long-term plan.
Education reform is a 10 year plan.
Uh, and the political cycle is effectively two years.
And so that's our concern, is
that the political cycle is taking over educational reform.
It's a 10, 15 year process.
So I'm a secondary teacher, uh,
an intervention in a 5-year-old.
I'm not saying that for 10 years. Yeah.
And so we could have three governments in that time.
Um, and so we want to make sure
that's consistent across that period.
And so by taking it out of the political cycle
by depoliticizing, it, I think is the best way forward
for a highly robust education system
and the best, uh, education, uh,
jurisdictions around the world do that.
Thank you. Uh, we now need to move on.
So thank you for your time, Greg. Thank you.
Uh, so we have, uh, ti Thai Charitable Trust
and they're on Zoom, so hopefully ready, need
to turn your cameras on and turn your sound on.
Kda. Um, KDA
Welcome. Raywin.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning. Okay.
Thank you. It's time for question over to you.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
I appear today on behalf of our trust.
We do not oppose reform, but we cannot support the bill
unless this is amended
to actively improve Maori educational outcomes and uphold.
The bill does not do that. Today, I'll address two issues.
First, the bill's failure
to address Maori educational success.
And second, the ta the risks created by the proposed
New Zealand school property agency for Maori land.
When Maori educational outcomes, the missing purpose
of this bill, this bill centralizes significant power
over attendance, regulation, teacher standards,
and property at the same time,
it removes the explicit obligation on school boards
to give effect to what is missing is any
mechanism to lift Maori educational success.
Maori children continue
to experience persistent inequities in education, not
because of a lack of ability or aspiration, but
because the system is not designed for Maori success,
this bill does nothing to change that.
We already know what works.
Maori education
consistently deliver better outcomes.
So when Maori design education Maori succeed,
yet this bill moves the opposite, in the opposite direction.
It centralizes control while weakening
Maori influence over decision decisions
that directly affect Maori learners.
And our position is simple and urgent.
The potential of Maori children is not being realized.
That is a loss for Maori,
and it's a loss for there is no evidence in this bill
that that improves Maori educational outcomes
or that it's a priority.
That is why we recommend the establishment of a statutory
Maori education, not as a symbolic body,
but as a Maori mandated nationally cred.
Credible co-design and advisory authority.
This pu must be nominated through Iwi leadership
and recognized Maori education.
Pu trusted by Maori educators, whanau
and communities, independent, resourced,
and accountable to parliament.
Its role should include co-designing education, regulations
and standards, advising the Secretary for Education Hero
and the school property agency, nsurance,
ensuring attendance and engagement frameworks, um,
respect TOA and Maori medium realities
and publicly reporting on Maori Luna's success.
Without this, Maori Luna remains subject to a system
that continues to underserved them
and their poten potential continues to be lost.
Um, why this matters in practice,
our trust delivers Kopa Maori science programs
and to Kopa Maori Andrew m units.
And we see firsthand how, uh,
centralized standards fail Maori learners
and how engagement, confidence,
and achievement lift when learning is culturally grounded.
The issue is not Maori children.
The issue is a system
that does not prioritize Maori's success.
A Maori education is not an obstacle to reform.
It is how reform succeeds school property
and Maori land so many schools.
This is the second point I want to make, uh,
sit on Maori land that was gifted by Maori on land,
gifted by Maori, taken under public works legislation
or subject to treaty settlements.
So I've served as at a,
as a trustee at a ol one school more than once.
I can see how a school property agency could reduce
burden on boards.
It could be a good thing, but only if it's treaty safe.
So one size fits all property model
risks erasing the history
and obligations attached to Maori land.
And without explicit safeguards, wnu, hapu
and iwi can be excluded from decisions about land
they gifted or lost.
So what we are asking for, we're not asking for disruption.
We are asking for minimum treaty consistent protections.
A statutory register recording how school land was acquired.
Mandatory iwi involvement
and decisions affecting Maori land treaty,
consistent pathways for disposal or transfer.
I believe that's happens now.
Kopa Maori design standards
and annual reporting to Parliament and Maori communities.
So these are not radical proposals.
They're ba basic standards of care. Mm.
In closing your bill centralizes power,
while remaining silent on Maori educational success,
it misses a critical opportunity to realize the potential
of Maori learners with targeted amendments.
Particularly a Maori education
and protections of Maori law.
Law, land Parliament can reform the system without
sacrificing maori outcomes or ran.
That's my submission.
Thank you Raywin for your very clear, uh, submission.
We don't appear to have any questions from the committee
and don't Oh, sorry.
One from one. Yeah, we do. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you Kilda.
Thank you very much for your submission. The minister often,
Uh, talks about
how the proposed changes in education are going
to address the equity gap, uh, particularly
for Maori.
Uh, those changes in approaches like structured literacy
and also, um, in curriculum.
Do you have anything to say to that?
Uh, well, I think via my submission,
you'll know that I don't agree.
I don't think they will. I don't, I mean, there are gaps.
Um, but any, um, resolution should be grounded in KA Maori.
And further to that, um, were you
or any other iwi organization consulted on the
proposals in this bill?
Have you been consulted in, um, uh, part of the,
uh, design of any of this?
No. And your expectation
around meaningful consultation
and engagement as partners would be?
Uh, well, I would've expected to have, um, had some,
um, better engagement.
Like, I didn't even know about it until the last minute.
Um, I didn't know how, how impacted it,
how it could be impact on our community, and I couldn't,
and I'm all for anything that's going to improve education.
Mm-hmm. And, um, I couldn't see anything.
I actually, it was a backward step. Mm-hmm.
Thank you very much, Ray,
when we do appreciate you coming on
and submitting for this bill.
Thank you. We will move on now
to Children's Rights Alliance Ro New Zealand.
Uh, we have Jackie s
and Sarah Tilney, hopefully online.
Welcome. We have Jackie
and Sarah, you seem to be muted, but we can see you.
There we go. And Jackie. Wonderful. Okay.
We have 10 minutes, uh, with you and the time is yours.
That includes questions over to you.
Uh, Kiara and Kote. I'm Sarah Ti.
I am a member of the Child
Rights Alliance Steering Committee. Jackie
Called Jackie sua.
I'm the Secretary for the Children's Rights Alliance
Committee and joining in
that capacity also the Child Rights Advocacy Director
for Save the Children, I'll pass to Sarah
to lead our submission.
Thank you very much for listening to us.
So for those of you who don't know the Child Rights
Alliance, Aldo New Zealand is a civil society coalition
committed to promoting
and advancing children's rights in Aldo New Zealand.
Our vision is an Aldo New Zealand that actively respects
and realizes the rights of all children.
Crams is also the country focal point under the United
Nations Convention on the rights of the child.
Here we don't comment on the sub substantive content
of the bill itself, but on the proposed amendment
to the Education and Training Act, early childhood reform,
which created Director of Regulation in in the ministry,
the recently announced amendment proposes that a director
of regulation early childhood sit within the Educational
Review Review Office.
We strongly oppose this amendment to create a director of
ION within ero.
Additionally, we oppose the transfer of regulatory functions
for private schools and school boarding hostels from the
ministry to a new director in the reg in ERO.
We are gravely concerned at the process
with which this amendment has been introduced.
We are disturbed the Treaty of Waitangi obligations
to partner honorably with treaty with Maori iwi.
Maori have not been upheld, and we are deeply concerned
because children's right do not seem to be considered.
And we believe that children's rights are at the center
of policy decision making.
We call for the mandatory use of child impact assessments
to analyze all proposed policy developments
that could significantly impact children.
The rights of children and the unique status of Tam
Nadi need to be taken into account.
Children have a right to an education
that fulfills their potential.
And it is the responsibility of all governments
to ensure that this happens.
This requires close attention to the principle articles
of the convention to take children's best interests into
account to ensure that all policies are non-discriminatory,
to ensure that they include the views of children,
even very young children.
And finally, policies should
promote survival and development.
Additionally, we note in Article four
that children's rights should be resourced
to the maximum extent possible.
These are the obligations the New Zealand government has
committed to in ratifying the convention
on the rights of the child.
There is also an expectation
that governments take on board the advice
of the UN Committee on the rights of the child.
Essentially, our main concerns are
that creating extra layers of bureaucracy serve
to dissipate accountability.
The protest undermines the enforcement powers of the MOE.
It also compromises the independence
of the Education Review Office.
We are concerned that the changes will reduce the
accountability of education providers
to deliver high quality education at all level
and robust child safeguarding requirements.
We're equally concerned that the role
of the Education Review Office as the arbiter
of quality is compromised
by introducing a regulatory function.
ERO has worked incredibly hard
with the early childhood sector to uplift quality delivery
to children and families using ECE services.
This is because of a network of relationships
with communities and with ua,
the focus has always been on keeping the child
at the heart of the matter.
That doesn't mean that this is uncontentious
or confrontational,
but the emphasis has, for the most part,
been on supportive progressive improvement.
The MOE on the other hand, is clearly the seat
of regulatory control.
They are responsible for licensing
and for ensuring regulatory processes are adhered to.
We're in concern that this proposed additional layer
of regulatory enforcement will be confusing.
There is an overall lack of coherence in the structures
and who does what has become a confused and cluttered space.
We recommend the funding would be better invested in
strengthening the process of review
and compliance across the current structures of eero.
For example, professional development
to enact recommendations
and reviews would be a cost effective solution.
Additionally, investing in greater understanding across the
sector of the role of the ERO
and how their functions are delivered
to better strengthen the quality of care and education.
Professional development is the key.
The MOE is responsible for implementing government policy.
The ERO role is to independently evaluate the effectiveness
or all of other ways of policy
and action independence is important here.
The proposed establishment of a direct of regulation
and ERO threatens that independence.
The integrity of the current functions of the system need
to be considered and protected.
EERO is responsible for independent review, analysis
and recommendations.
The MOE is responsible for upholding operational
and compliance functions.
Together, the two bodies serve to deliver quality
and progressive education for all children.
Across the center. The sector, the director of regulation,
an ERO is an unnecessary bureaucratic leader.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much, uh, for your submission, both of you.
It doesn't appear that we have
any questions from the committee.
Oh, we have one from Lawrence.
Oh, sorry. I did hear you down
Arms. Thank you so much,
Chi. Um, thank you Sarah. And, um, sorry.
Uh, and, uh, Jackie, for your submission, um,
my question is actually around the U-N-C-R-C
'cause you've, uh, mentioned that in your submission.
And Sarah, you also mentioned article four,
but I wanna focus on article three,
which is state party's responsibility.
We've seen both in this bill
and previous ECE reform bill that there was,
there has been no child impact statement
or earlier consultation hasn't taken place, for example,
with, uh, Manona
or the child's, um, commissioner on some of these.
I wondered, what do you think?
Um, our, the consequence,
I guess from an international perspective would be for OT
and New Zealand to not uphold
specifically our responsibility under Article
three of U-N-C-R-C?
I think it's largely reputational,
but I think when you look at the functions
of the committee on the UN rights of the child, they, um,
they are, their role is to advise
and offer insights to governments current past together on
how to best, um,
integrate children's rights into all policy development.
So I think, you know, as you know,
in the early childhood sector, we've been world leaders.
And similarly in the compulsory sector,
our curriculum documents are highly regarded
because of their principled approach, which, um,
have been developed over many years in consultation
with experts, IE teachers and families,
and at times children.
I think what we fail to do in
New Zealand is actually take into account how we can best
integrate children's rights into policy development so
that children are at the center.
And if you look at the last report from the UN committee on
the rights of the child, their advice was very, very clear
and not, um, and,
and very sort of pertinent to current policy development.
So they, I think largely it's reputational.
I think also, um, where by not adhering,
by not taking their advice on board, we risk, um,
the benefit of international experience, uh,
actually informing how we work alongside and with children.
Have you got anything to add, Jackie?
Just that the convention on the rights
of the child is a framework and a guide for best results
and, and what we can do for our children.
So if we fail to implement the convention on the rights
of the child, we're, we're losing opportunities
to really advance the wellbeing,
development and needs of our children.
So we urge the government to use the convention as a pal,
the powerful tool that it is, and to put it into practice
and really consider children's best interest from their
point of view rather than from adults.
No best a top down approach.
Thank you both. Sarah, thank you Sarah
and Jackie for your time in submitting on this bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
We will now move on to Fiona Al, who we have in person.
Uh, Fiona. Wonderful. Approach the table.
And we have you here as an individual submitters.
We have five minutes of time with you that includes time
for questions and we take your submission as read.
Thank you, Katie. Tina, um, thank you very much
for the opportunity to present today.
Uh, my name is Fiona l I'm a registered primary school
teacher and I'm a researcher.
I've spent my career focusing on
how people learn to teach effectively.
According to the explanatory note,
the bill quote clarifies workforce roles
and functions, uh, unquote
by taking key responsibilities from the teaching council
and giving them to the ministry.
That name is misleading. The reforms do not seek to clarify.
They seek to fundamentally alter the relationship
between teachers and teaching
and between teachers and the government.
Instead of teachers defining their own professional
standards and deciding how new teachers will be educated,
the Ministry of Education will decide what teaching is,
what good teaching consists of,
and how people should be prepared for teaching.
This is a massive shift
and it effectively de professionalizes teaching.
This will have long-term unintended consequences going well
beyond the things that this bill is trying to fix.
My position is not ideological.
The international research evidence is clear.
If we depro professionalize teaching,
teacher expertise will decline and so will recruitment
and retention.
Effective teachers are not technicians.
They're knowledgeable, adaptive,
and reflective professionals who make really good,
well-informed in the moment decisions.
And this is true of any form
of pedagogy you want to discuss.
It's at the heart of explicit teaching.
It's at the heart of a range of approaches.
So I believe it's a really robust, um, truth.
And in this regard, they're just like doctors, lawyers,
and engineers, and indeed all professionals,
teacher expertise, recruitment, retention are all important
for better student outcomes
and all are best served by continuing
to treat teaching as a profession.
But they're fundamentally undermined
by the proposals in this bill
to take away from the profession, those responsibilities
for setting standards and standards for teacher education.
And we can, fortunately,
we can learn from overseas experience
because the architecture
of these proposals was developed in England,
and we can see what's happened there.
England has a large teacher
recruitment and retention problem.
One in 11 teachers will leave this year, quite surprisingly,
perhaps feeling undervalued
by policy makers was the third highest reason
for leaving teaching in England last year.
And a key recommendation from their annual teacher wellbeing
survey in 2025 was that the climate
of professional trust must be improved.
We do not have to make the same mistakes as England.
We can, we can and must retain teaching as a profession.
Many jurisdictions whose education outcomes we admire,
recognize that teacher professionalism
and autonomy are critical to teacher success,
wellbeing, and retention.
Last year's TELUS report from the OECD provides
ample evidence of this.
It's important not
to do professionalized teaching if we want better student
outcomes, which is what we are all in the,
we are all in this for New Zealand's TELUS responses last
year showed that 70% of our teachers felt valued
by the parents and guardians in their communities,
but only 14% felt valued by policy makers.
This is a very concerning finding and removing the standards
and putting them in the Ministry
of Education will make this much worse.
It's worth noting here that the bill would give this control
to any minister and their ministry into the future.
You may be comfortable with giving that control
to the current minister,
but would you be comfortable with giving it
to a future minister of a different political persuasion?
It is better by far,
that decision making about teacher standards
and teacher education remain in the hands
of the teaching profession.
In summary, this bill does not clarify roles and functions.
It fundamentally changes them.
The interests of New Zealand students are best served
by continuing to treat teachers as competent professionals
and trustworthy partners in improving educational outcomes.
The provisions in this bill that take standard setting
and ITE standards from the teaching council
and assign them to the minister
and sec secretary must I submit, be removed.
Thank you for your time and your attention.
Uh, thank you Fiona. Look, we actually have only time
for one question and grant's been waiting a
while, so we'll give that to Grant. Thank you.
Yeah, thank Oh, thank you for
a very interesting submission.
My, my, my challenge is we've got a situation where
around about a quarter of primary school teachers
struggle with teaching maths.
So, and, and that hasn't just happened overnight. Very true.
So how do you then address that for a teaching council?
That, that would appear to me has failed in their, in their
job to ensure that the, that the stu the teachers coming
through the, into the profession can actually be competent
and confident to teach maths?
Sure. Um, it is a big long term problem
and it's not unique to New Zealand,
so it's a common problem across anglophone countries
and primary school settings.
Um, so thinking that it's just kind of a failure
of one particular organization leads you to think
that if you just operate on
that organization, you'll solve that problem.
I think, um, the council has acted to raise standards and,
and when the minister wanted testing standards raised
again, acted quickly to do that.
As did teacher education providers.
Um, I'm a maths education researcher myself,
so there's nothing I'd like better than everyone
to feel confident or competent.
I think one of the main contributors
to the situation we're in at the moment has been the lack
of investment in professional
development in the last 20 years.
So since we had, um, we had a substantial investment by the,
um, national government, uh, in the numeracy project.
And since then we've had no, um, real systematic widespread,
um, freely available PD until these new initiatives.
Uh, and I submit that people who come
to teach income from a range of backgrounds, um,
I know from my own experience that they can learn
to teach maths well, but if you keep on teaching them how
to teach maths well throughout their career,
they will become really good competent mathematics teachers.
And, and we can see that in other jurisdictions as well.
So I'm not sure that it's, the council's failing
and I just think that doing this to solve
that problem is a little bit like hitting a, hitting a tack
with a really, really, really big sledgehammer,
which will have a whole lot of other things happen around it
that you will come to regret.
I agree that that's a problem. Love to help you solve it.
Mm-hmm. But I think this is the wrong method.
Thank you. Thank you for your time and do appreciate that.
Uh, thank you Fiona. We need to move on now to Tatiana
and KO in person.
Wonderful. We have, uh, five minutes with you.
Hopefully you've heard about
questions included in that time. Time is yours.
Thank you, Koto.
My name's Tatiana Cinco
and I'm speaking here as a mother
of two primary age school children.
I speak as a board member
and, um, I also speak
as an education professional who's invested 20 years
of her life and a career in adult education.
And I have witnessed firsthand
and have been involved in various seats
how vocational reform can be protracted, messy, and painful.
We're still going through it today, so,
but I'm here to speak about the education
and training system reform bill, if enacted in its entirety,
this bill will erode all that.
We as mothers, as parents hold dear partnership
participation for all children
and protection of diversity in our communities.
This bill creates rigid compliance by design.
Education policy should be amongst the most stable
and bipartisan areas of public policy.
Decisions that shape children's learning.
Identity and life opportunities
must endure across election cycles
and governments that endurance is only possible when reforms
are co-designed, evidence-based
and supported by broad buy-in from parents, educators,
children, school boards, iwi, and communities.
However, this bill does the opposite.
Rather than building consensus, it centralizes power,
it accelerates change and limits participation.
For all those stakeholders that I spoke about.
It advances reforms that have deep
and long-term consequences without securing cross-sector
agreement or public trust.
In doing so at risks,
embedding instability into the education system
where direction shifts with political priorities
and educational market forces rather
than the needs of our children.
I ask you, please listen to all the people
that will come before you today.
Listen with your heart open
and curiosity, I ask you when,
when you write your report
to really consider the opportunity cost to really consider
how much social capital will you invest in this really large
and complex reform?
And what would you rather the teachers be
doing teaching maths?
I ask the committee to please protect my children,
protect your own children and our children from the risks
and harm this legislation can create.
At its core, this bill excludes parents.
It excludes pa uh, au tamari from meaningful participation
and decisions that directly affect them.
Consultation and act of listening, partnership
and shared decision making is repeatedly replaced
with notification.
A clear example in this change is to the health curriculum
where boards were who previously required to consult
with their school communities.
They're now required only to inform them, the parents about
what will be taught and how it will be delivered.
That's not consultation, that's compliance.
This approach directly contradicts the pri principles of
which require, require active participation, good faith,
co-design with UA
and au not passive receipts of decisions already made.
The removal of explicit fertility obligation from the
educational legislation was not an isolated change.
It was a signal for many parents like me
and those working in diverse schools
with diverse communities, it confirmed
what they're already experiencing.
That partnership could be removed when it becomes
inconvenient that equity can be reframed as excess
and that foundational commitments could be set aside in the
name of simplicity and efficiency.
This reform approaches approach treats parents, educators,
and those with deep lived experience like me
as optional rather than essential in shaping this change.
This is a serious risk and not just to educational outcomes,
but to the public confidence in this democratic,
democratic process itself.
As a result, parents whanau are increasingly informed rather
than genuinely consulted, reducing their ability
to shape the children's learning pathways, environments
and opportunities for future prosperity of this country.
What this means, this parent for parents,
this bill means less influence, less responsiveness,
less local decision making, fewer avenues to raise concerns
and challenge decisions, protracted timeframes
for response and greater distance from the decision power
where it would sit for children,
especially Maori disabled neurodivergent learners.
It means reduced flexibility, marginalization
of their culturally grounded and relational assessment
and learning flattened into comparable data.
That's not partnership, it's adaptation
to a system already decided.
The submission is not about resisting change,
it's about resisting systemic harm.
Harm is most likely one of those closest
to children are excluded from decisions about them.
We, we, I ask this committee to slow down this reform
and take this process seriously
because education reform done to communities rather than
with them will not deliver either efficiencies
or meaningful results.
Our children deserve care.
Our children deserve opportunity for curiosity, creativity,
and connection with their world.
Parents deserve partnership, not passive notification.
And as it stands, this bill will delete deliver
neither. Thank you. Mm.
Thank you Tatiana. We have no time for questions for you,
but, uh, appreciate you being here for this.
Thank you very much. Uh,
next we have the New Zealand Principles Federation.
We have Jason, uh, miles, Dr. Kim Hillwood and Alex Map.
We have 10 minutes for you as an organization
that includes time for questions
and the time is yours to do you wish?
Got in our committee.
Jason Miles. Uh, my name's Jason Miles.
I'm the president of the New Zealand Principles Federation.
Um, supported here today by, uh, Kim, Dr. Kim Halewood,
our senior researcher
and Alex Maples Mapleton, our Senior Communications Advisor.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
NZPF represents primary principles across primary,
intermediate, secondary area schools
and special education settings throughout RTO New Zealand.
Our members lead diverse school communities from remote,
rural kura to large urban schools,
serving students from all backgrounds
and from learning needs.
We take seriously our responsibility to speak on the impact
of this bill, uh, that it will have on children whanau
and the education profession.
This bill represents a coordinated shift
of decision making power away from educators, communities
and Maori and into the hands of the minister
and min ministerial appointees.
Across the proposed changes to curriculum, teacher,
professional standards, attendance regulations,
school accountability, system monitoring, and property.
The pattern is the same.
Professional experience, practitioner judgment
and community voice are replaced by political directives
and centrally imposed rules.
NZPF is not opposed to reform.
We acknowledge that curriculum needs mechanisms for review,
that regular attendance is a serious issue
and it's the schooling system
must be transparent and accountable.
Unfortunately, the government's approach to education reform
confuses quality with speed and central control.
This bill assumes that unfettered political control
can replace our school's professional expertise
and their partnerships with communities at Risks.
Entrenching inequalities destabilizing the curriculum,
further damaging teacher morale
and weakening the trust on which
effective schooling depends.
We are especially concerned about the bill's implications
for TED TI provisions that allow the minister
to unilaterally rewrite curriculum standards.
Attendance rules define system success
and make property decisions without genuine partnership
as a leap backwards and appears
to entirely dismiss the crown's obligations under tei.
Moreover, it completely undermines the partnership.
Our schools are working hard to build with UA
and their au This is unacceptable.
We see similar issues in the treatment
of the teaching council, which is our professional body.
No other regulated profession in ROA has its standards,
its code of conduct and governing body placed
so directly under ministerial directive and control.
Removing the practitioner majority in the governance
of the teaching council and transferring the standard
setting to the Secretary
of Education sends a simple message.
Teachers cannot be trusted to regulate their own profession.
This is fundamentally at odds.
With every international example of a high performing,
high trust education system.
This unprecedented ministerial overreach
runs throughout the bill attendance provisions,
the schools of serious concern, label charter schooling,
compulsory system monitoring, and a new property agency.
These sanction ministerial power over a profession
that needs partnership and autonomy to function effectively.
It is imperative that we maintain professional control over
teaching standards and governance of the teaching council.
That we retain principal discretion
and attendance that we ensure struggling schools have
support mechanisms not stigmatizing nas,
and that we protect Maori rights and assure partnership.
The recommendations you make to the house
will shape a gener uh, generation.
The bill in its current state will see greater political
overreach instability, deeper inequalities,
and further erosion of trust between schools, communities,
and government compliance.
And central discretion has been put a ahead of supportive
evidence-based approaches that respond to local context.
Something we fear will be particularly damaging
for Maori Pacific and vulnerable communities.
Our request is simple.
Do not centralize power at the expense of those
who know our learners and our communities best.
Mm-hmm. If we get this reform right, we have the opportunity
to strengthen the schooling system through partnership,
through evidence
and respect for professional expertise, work with the sector
and build, uh, to build reforms of the stable, equitable
te honoring and professionally grounded.
The final thought for you.
In every classroom in sits sit children
who need the very best start in life.
The children need teachers who understand what they need
to do to best teach and support those children.
At NZPF, we would like to work in partnership
with the policy makers to provide the best opportunities
for each and every child.
An education system that is driven solely
by those sitting in the beehive
and ministry offices is not what will make a difference.
This bill is political overreach
and a profession that deserves support
and direct involvement in shaping the future of our country.
Thank you. Uh, we probably only have time
for one question, but will I had you first?
Oh, thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, for your thorough submission.
I think just, uh, stepping back from the things
that you have put in your submission,
why do you think the minister
and the government are doing this?
It's hard for me to get into the minister's head.
I think that there is, uh, there is a lack of engagement
with the sector and there is, uh, engagement with overseas
educators and systems that the minister is, uh,
looking at instead of engaging with our,
our national experts here in,
And just my supplement around that was, you talked about
how important it is to collaboratively with the mm-hmm.
Sector in a trusting and respectful manner. Yeah.
What has been NZ pfs involvement in the development
of this reform bill?
We've had no involvement, no engagement.
Uh, as there were short questions.
I have time for one more. Lawrence, you were,
Uh, thank you. Um,
thank you for coming and happy New Year.
Uh, your submission, uh, is one of the few
that specifically mentioned attendance.
And one of the things that we saw with attendance is
that there's actually no real evidence to say
that the exemption has been misused.
And you wrote about the impact is will have vulnerable
communities, um, noting there is no consultation.
Mm-hmm. What feedback have you had specifically from rural
schools on the issues do we have
with centralizing attendance
and not allowing discretionary use by principals?
Well, that it would take away the discretion of principles
for personal circumstances within their community.
Uh, not only rural schools, but uh, kura, uh, urban schools.
There is always that personal need for, um, families
to have discretion with their attendance.
It is not used unilaterally.
It is used in only circumstances that are out
of the parents' control.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. That's all that we've got time for.
Appreciate it. Thank you very much. Yes. Thank you.
Uh, to the three of you. Thank you for submission. Alright.
Next we have Erica Locke online.
Uh, the following, uh, six
or five submitters are all on
Zoom, that mode.
Erica, if you can hear me,
we have five minutes for your submission.
Just need you to turn your camera on and your audio
and then we are over to you.
Perhaps we don't have Erica, if Zachary is,
if Zachary is available, we might just mm-hmm.
Get straight through to Zachary
and then if Erica comes back on, we'll get to her second.
So Zachary, mark him. No, we do.
Zachary, if you could turn your camera on
and your audio on, we have five minutes with you.
Those online just need to accept the invitation
to become a panelist, um, for your submission.
Just for those preparing to speak.
It is there, but on mute, you're there,
but on mute, Zachary, if you'd like to unmute,
Can you hear me? Yes.
We can't see you, but we'll take your voice.
Okay. Yeah, you've Got five minutes.
Uh, Zachary, the time is yours.
Thank you very much. Uh,
and warmest greetings to all members of the committee today.
Um, my comments that I am going to use
or say are in relation to the written submission,
which I presume you've got in front of you.
Yes. Um, my name is Zachary, um,
actually Zach Markham.
Um,
Oh, Zachary, we losing your audio?
Are you stepping away from your device?
No, I've got phone carry on. Okay. Alright.
Okay. Hang on. Right. There we go. Ah, yeah, there you go.
Um, I'm speaking from my phone today, um,
because my laptop is, is playing up.
Okay. I have 19 years
of teaching experience in a specialist school context,
and also as a parent has been have,
my life has been deeply enriched by having two neurodiverse,
uh, young p people sons, um,
and a o New Zealand.
We have across society
and specifically in education,
a growing diverse student population, both in culture,
language, and in the area which
to focus on on neuro adversity.
The legislation as written, which I read, does not allow
for an in-depth knowledge, skill and understanding,
but also for families that need a different approach
and indeed the rights of every child to have direct access
to education and related care through appropriate
and po positive relationships.
There are several aspects of the legislation
that I believe are in punishment in nature
and does not allow for the understanding of, of tamaki
who need an alternative approach.
One of the examples I wish to highlight is the removal
of the principal's ability to apply discretion
to attendance, um,
being in a special specialist school con context.
That is often done now as many
of our students come into our school with high levels
of anxiety, high levels of undiagnosed needs, um,
and in some cases, these students cannot be in the classroom
or attend school full, full all time.
This means many schools are such as my own,
but others are developing alternative plans for this group.
An example of this may include a detailed transition plan
to return a learner to school who has complex behavior,
sensory and learning needs.
A further concern is that Secretary of Education and
therefore the Minister of Education, have complete authority
in terms of this bill
and how schools develop systems to support families
and local communities.
This concern is mainly related
to reducing the authority principals
and senior leadership teams have in developing a localized
curriculum and state statements that allow all students
from all to actually succeed.
Um, I raised this, this concern specifically in section 90
and insertions of 90 A
and 90 B, um, which moves to, uh,
moves from, uh, democratic
and professional curriculum statements into a space
of political control, which is a dangerous space to be in,
both in the education sector
and for our most vulnerable students.
In line with my pre previous comment
comments is my deep concern over the proposal for almost
complete political control of the teacher's council
to the Ministry of Education, the min, the Minister
of Education and other related a agencies such
as the Education Review o Office.
I would argue all three roles
and, um, would not
as a guarantee have the high level of knowledge
and understanding of what it means all children to grow
and succeed, including those
that need a specialized teaching approach.
The Teaching Council was designed and creative for teachers
and by teachers.
It is and should not be an organization designed to punish
or enforce political priorities.
Further, increasing political,
political control over the teacher's council would,
I believe reduce the emphasis
and priorities for all learners to succeed
through appropriate teaching
and professional standards, which is the case now.
Rather, an emphasis would shift from teaching
and learning to government and political priorities.
These are two different areas and
therefore two different outcomes.
I ask the committee to consider what is more important
for all children in that terra,
not just our higher achievers.
Again, thank you for the opportunity
to appear in front of you today. Now, Mihi,
Thank you very much, Zach.
That is all the time we have with you, uh, this morning,
but thank you for making yourself
available and for your submission. We appreciate it.
Thank, thank, thank you. Thank you very much.
Okay, bye.
And we'll move on by, we'll move on now to Erica Locke.
Hopefully, um, all ready to go.
If you could turn your camera on and your audio on.
Oh, um, we have five minutes with you, Erica.
Okay. Thank you for this opportunity to speak.
Um, I'm going to take my submission as read
and just, uh, go through probably the 10, um, most important
elements that deeply concern me on this, um, proposed bill.
Um, firstly is the
whole positioning of, uh,
and Matua.
Um, my Tu Puna were, um,
on the Hoing arriving in New Zealand in Hawkes Bay.
Um, I have ancestors
who arrived in Blenheim from England pre
Titi and from Scotland.
Um, uh, at times I see myself as a full New Zealander,
and every time Titi is not honored.
It hurts all parts of myself
and throughout this bill is not honored.
Um, it diminishes, um, Maori voice
and it diminishes participation,
participation and, um,
partnership protection in every way from the individual
whanau level through to school level, board
of trustee level, and at a wider consultation level.
That's the first concern.
Secondly, the curriculum, um, centralization.
The role in reviews
and singular curriculum statements will undermine local
teacher autonomy and professional input.
Um, the educational concerns from the top
of the North island and North Northland schools are quite
different to those down in the south.
Um, the transfer of teacher standards to the Secretary
of Education, this removes key teacher council autonomy
and reduces the profession and demeans the profession.
The reducing consultation obligations from consultation
to information for the health curriculum.
This is a real concern, especially for all our, um,
neurodiverse and special needs students and families.
It reduces community voice in every way.
This entire bill, the mandated
participation in studies is of real concern.
While I understand the need for a government to have
system-wide data, the owners on an expense
on schools is enormous.
Um, there is a huge compliance burden in this.
The, I'm concerned about the charter school, um,
considerations in the bill.
The charter multi-school contracts opens a pathway
for further privatization of our schools,
and I do believe most strongly that
we need a well-funded public school system.
I don't like to think of my taxes going to pri uh, private,
um, profit making educational,
uh, organizations.
The strict attendance exemption rules.
The fact that the secretary makes these rules only does not
allow for the huge variation
of needs and unique needs of our students.
I worked as an RTLB for more than 25 years.
I've been part of the plans that bring our students back
and school,
and I know some
of the incredible situations that we waste.
We're a small country, but we only really have
Starship Hospital up in Auckland.
Every time a child goes there, families are imploded
and often the children will go round to aunties.
S Nanas schools work incredibly hard
to provide an ongoing education
for children caught up in these circumstances.
Um, that's just one small example.
The N-Z-S-P-A establishment, it's a crown agency
with minister policy direction.
There are potentially local governance constraints, lack
of consultation, lack of local input.
Again, when there's top down directions.
The Aero Minister coupling interventions,
the increased politicization
of education already education is a political, um,
hot potato in so many ways.
This will increase it, it'll reduce trust in the profession,
which is at an all time low from my perspective.
Um, I've been in the profession over 50 years.
I am a parent, a grandparent, a great grandparent
for children in mainstream and children in, uh, Maori.
Um, I agree with our previous speakers, Wyn
and Fiona, who made comments about, um,
the diminishing professional autonomy of teachers being, um,
a key target almost of this bill.
I have deep concerns over the rushed process
and the tight, um, submission window.
The, even, even the fact that
these submissions are happening now is appalling.
Thank you for your time, Erica.
We have reached the end of our time with you this morning.
Uh, we must move on to our next submitter,
but we do appreciate you making yourself
available and for your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. And we must move on now
to our Tier Infinite Academy,
which is joining us via Zoom, Harry Rule Stone.
If you can turn your camera on and turn your sound on.
Wonderful Harry. Very efficient. Over to you.
We have got 10 minutes with you this morning.
Uh, Kiao. Good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
Um, my name is Harry.
I head legal and compliance,
and I've been closely involved in the establishment
of Alter and Academy.
Um, infinite Academy is a charter school
with students starting next week on 2nd of February.
Uh, it is New Zealand's first charter school designed
to deliver schooling entirely through online learning.
Uh, the school has been established
to provide online schooling option
for students throughout the country,
for whom full-time attendance at a physical school may be
impractical or unsuitable
or for students in their families seeking, uh,
an additional schooling option.
My comments today are limited to the provisions of the bill
that directly affect, um, charter schools,
particularly under multi-school contracting arrangements,
as well as the proposed changes to the attendance,
um, regime.
So first, we support the bills proposal to enable a sponsor
to be approved to operate one or more charter schools.
Um, it's our view that this appropriately recognizes
that some delivery models will operate
with centrally governed
or specialist structures, um,
while still requiring clear school specific
accountability for outcomes.
Uh, we also support the additional criteria in the proposed
section 2 1 2 I six, um,
in particular. Sorry,
Sorry. No, that's okay.
Harry, we just appear
to be missing your submission in our
paperwork, but please continue.
Oh, we'll make sure that we get that paperwork distributed.
Keep going, keep going. No problem. I got it.
Different sequence. Sorry. Have you got it?
Different sequence. It's mark.
Copy. Carry on please, Harry.
Um, in particular, we support the requirement
for the board to consider the sponsor's overall operating
model, uh, including
how resources will be allocated across the
schools in practice.
Multi-school operating models may involve shared services,
uh, for example, governance support, finance curriculum, uh,
digital infrastructure
specialist learning support functions.
We consider it important
that the provision be applied in a way that makes sense
for both online and physical schools so
that the shared operating models can be assessed on their
merits while maintaining clear expectations for governance,
uh, educational outcomes for students
and fi financial sustainability at each school.
Um, secondly, we support the proposed amendments
to Section 2 1 2 L, um, enabling the agency
to enter into a single charter school
contract covering one or more schools.
Uh, we also support the introduction of 2 1 2 L five A,
which requires key operational
and performance matters to be addressed, uh, in
that multi-school contract.
In relation to the contracting, uh,
the legislation will shape
how the charter school agency will draft their contract
templates and their reporting expectations
of the charter schools.
Uh, our submission is aimed at ensuring the framework
supports school level accountability without inadvertently
requiring a fragmented contractual or compliance process.
Uh, we support the intent of, uh, subsection five A.
Our key point is that the
school specific accountability can be achieved
through a single coherent reporting framework.
For example, one annual audit
and reporting process with school specific sections rather
than requiring multiple separate reports
or reporting cycles for each school.
Uh, this is to preserve transparency at the school level
while keeping the regime workable in practice.
Uh, just building on
that point about coherence in multi-school contracts, um,
first we'd invite the committee to consider whether
subsection six
of the existing 2 1 12 L should be especially reflected
in the amended contracting framework.
That subsection currently requires contracts
for charter schools offering distance learning
to address matters such as engagement, attendance, uh,
pastoral care, online safety, um, in
that contract as drafted.
Those requirements are not explicitly carried through
to the multi-school, um, amendment, which creates a risk
that those matters are not clearly set out
for online charter schools operating
under a multi-school contract.
Mm-hmm. Uh, second, we note the importance of coherence
between the approval stage and the contracting stage.
Um, the two sections serve a different purpose,
but in practice it's helpful
that the matters considered at the approval stage
and those matters reflected in the contract are aligned over
time, particularly in a multi-school arrangement.
If a sponsor is approved on the basis
of a particular operating model, uh, the contract
and any variations should broadly reflect that same model.
Um, finally on the proposed changes to the attendance, uh,
regime, we've seen in previous online schooling approvals in
New Zealand that
where regulatory settings assume a physical campus model,
online schools can end up meeting physical school proxies
that don't, uh, align with, with reality, um,
in the online schooling environment.
Our goal here is to avoid unintended compliance outcomes
like that while still supporting strong accountability, um,
across both multi-school contracts and attendance.
The bill establishes the architecture and the rules
and contract settings will provide the operational detail
for, for operators and for schools.
Uh, it's just important that the act enables those settings
to be implemented coherently and in a way that is workable.
Uh, those are the key points from the submissions.
And thank you again for the opportunity.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
Well, wonderful. Thank you, Harry.
We have our first question from Lawrence,
and then we have Carl and Panchi.
Thank you. Uh, thank you Chair.
I I wanna pick up on your last point, Harry, in terms
of attendance, um,
because you have addressed in your submission the idea that,
you know, non-physical school model attendance is necessary
through school student engagement participation
rather than physical presence.
And I wondered with the limited ability for exemptions
and a kind of more centralized control of
how attendance is scored, what concerns would that have if,
let's say the, the guidance
or the framework that has been done by the secretary, is
that, uh, a level of physical presence either in person
or online is required in a school environment?
Are we saying in the hypothetical situations,
the secretary sets the rules that you, you must be on campus
for four hours a day?
Yeah. Like you must be in, I mean, on campus for,
in the online environment is different.
Right. But you know, the idea is that you have
to be physically in a classroom to be able
to be marked as present.
Yeah. I mean, Physically or virtually. Yeah.
Our point, um, and what we are striving
for is not just being, uh, present but also engaged.
And I think that's probably the most important thing.
Uh, you can't just log into a Zoom and, uh, sit there
and not participate.
And participation doesn't necessarily mean, um, you know,
speaking up, but actually listening in.
So I guess our concern is we just don't want the rules to,
um, not get the outcome we actually want,
which is better education for students.
Just one supplement supplementary on this.
If for example, I agree,
like participation is incredibly important.
Sometimes you could have students who are physically in a
classroom but not actually
participating in a classroom as well.
Do you see something like the, the use of participation
and engagement to be something that's broader than just
what is in a online or distant learning environment?
But that should be something that's considered in general?
I'm sorry, I'm not sure I understand the question and I
Might have to have to move on if that's okay.
So Carl, thank you. Okay. Alright. Right.
Uh, thanks Chair. Thanks very much for the submission.
Just regarding your point around 2 1 2 L
five A and it being, um, clearly understood that,
um, the changes to 2 1 2 L um, need
to be understood alongside the operating, um,
school specific requirements.
Did you have any proposed wording
or, um, view on how making
that clear could, um, could occur?
Um, And if you haven't given that any sort
of specific thought, happy to receive that after just Yeah.
Help feed into our consideration.
No, not not immediately right now,
but yeah, afterwards I can, um, uh, send something across.
Great. Uh, in that case, we'll move on to Pam's question.
Thank you. About your point about a multi-school sponsor,
uh, what do you say to, uh, another submitter who said that,
uh, with that there is a potential
that undue influence on policy, uh, policy settings
and also on, uh, your view on, um, delivery,
that delivery could be compromised?
Uh, that would, I don't think we'd agree with that view.
Um, I guess e each sponsor has its obligations set out in
the contract and at legislation.
Uh, I don't know how that would, um,
give it undue influence over policy settings.
Um, and sorry, the second part of your question
About the delivery compromise delivery for students.
I think with the, um, resources
for those functions I mentioned like curriculum design,
digital infrastructure, governance being centralized,
it gives more resource to the actual delivery
of the, the learning to students.
So I think a multi-school arrangement would be more
effective, uh, and more efficient
and be able to deliver education to more students.
Right. Thank you very much.
Thank you for your time, Harry.
We appreciate you making yourself
available for this process.
Uh, we will move on to appearance of vision
and peer New Zealand, uh,
Dr. Rebecca Graham appearing via Zoom.
Hopefully you've heard the previous instructions.
You can accept as a panelist,
turn your camera on and your audio on.
And we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Welcome, Rebecca, the time is now yours.
That includes questions.
Lovely, lovely.
Um, Kiara, nice to see you all.
Uh, my children are still at home,
so I'm looking forward to them going back.
So if there's any additional noise, apologies in advance.
Um, I know you've got my written submission, uh,
and in my oral submission, I wanted
to talk a little bit about our students' experiences
because what has struck me is that this bill doesn't seem
to understand the experiences, the lived experiences
of our children
and our families, um, within the blind and low vision sector.
Um, so for our children, uh, who are blind
and very low vision, uh, they tend to receive support
for education via blends, um, which is the blind
and low vision education network.
New Zealand, uh,
and blends have a campus in, uh,
where they bring families up
for intensives sort of two or three days.
Uh, but they also have visual resource centers across the
country, uh, who employ RTVs, uh, resource teacher vision,
who provide support
and training for teachers in local schools, uh,
and support for the student, uh, and,
and families in terms of accessing education,
accessing the curriculum, uh,
and being able to have an inclusive education.
Um, as a general side of things, uh, blind
and low vision learners get systemic
and structural support in that regard.
However, even though, uh,
children get a great deal more consistent
and structural support than many other disabled learners,
they're still facing challenges.
Uh, schools and educators really continue to struggle
to be able to include our kids
and provide an inclusive education.
Uh, and to us, an inclusive education is one
where you have the curriculum and you adapt it.
It's not a segregated separate curriculum, um,
but it's where the curriculum
and the school environment is adapted in reasonable ways so
that, uh, blind
and low vision learners can participate
alongside their peers.
Um, we last year encountered a number
of challenges, um, where I'm working with the family.
Uh, one example is a school that said, uh,
essentially your child can only attend in the hours
that they have one-to-one funded support.
And that one-to-one funded support is generally
between 10 and 17 hours.
So you can see straight away this child is not receiving the
education that they need
and that they should have access to.
Uh, and the reason, um, for
that from schools when they say things like your child can
only attend if they have one-to-one funded support, um, is
around resourcing and
around the schools facing the sharp end
of inadequate resourcing and being stretched too thin.
Um, now I know, uh, and,
and you should know, uh, that actually it's, it's not right
to say that, that that is actually a breach
of the child's right to an ED education
and it's a breach of the existing legislation.
Uh, but parents often don't know that
and they don't want to rock the boat
and get the school offside.
Um, another example, um, we use a very clever,
very talented lad, uh, and he dropped physics
because he was unable
to take physics in his preferred alternate
format, which is braille.
Uh, and there were issues around, um, NZQA and braille
and being able to, um, learn
and study in a way that met his, uh, needs.
Uh, and that's a real shame
because this is a very clever kid
and he was already making these decisions based on
what he could access in, in, in a format.
Um, and, and the mom's a great advocate
and, uh, she advocates very strongly.
Uh, but also we get tired as parents about having
to advocate every year all the time about so many things.
And, and you just have to go,
is this a battle I want to fight right now?
And parents shouldn't have to be doing that.
And again, it's about resourcing.
Um, it's about ensuring that, uh, all our disabled children,
but particularly from our perspective at PBI,
we're about a blind and low vision that the parents
and the schools have the resources they need.
Uh, and this bill isn't addressing any of those challenges.
Um, another one, uh, we have a child with, uh,
what's called a dual disability, so deaf and blind.
Uh, and the way things are set up there is you have
to choose the primary disability
and then the secondary disability gets less funding,
which is, uh, it doesn't really work, uh,
because of, obviously you need support with both.
Um, people do their best.
Um, but he had, again, a parent that's advocating
and being told by educators, oh, no, we can't,
we can't change the classroom to suit just your child.
It's unfair on the other kids.
We can't declutter the classroom even
though your child can't see.
And it's making it really difficult for them
because it would be unfair on the other kids.
Uh, and that's a lack of understanding by the educator
around reasonable accommodations.
Um, and a lack of training around how
to navigate the disability sector
and what you need to do and what that looks like.
Uh, and again, at this parent, by the time they, they came
to us just exhausted
and really struggling to know what to do
and how to advocate,
and knowing that their child would benefit from attending
school and attending full-time and being able to participate
and have an inclusive education, um,
and butting up against a, a school that was small,
that was underfunded, um, that was sharing, uh,
they didn't have any senco, they had an SLEC,
so sharing an LEC across three different schools.
So again, sufficient resources spread too thin,
a lack of education and training.
Um, one of the challenges, one of the many challenges,
um, is that decisions are made for disabled people
and for disabled learners without consultation.
And this has come through really strongly in this bill.
I, I think about the catch cry, nothing about us without us.
And then I look at what's been implemented here
and the, the lack of consultation, the lack of connection
with as your CMO written submiss
with what's going on in the sector in terms
of this new framework, um, uh,
concentrating power in the hands of the minister.
Um, which then makes it really scary if you have a minister
that doesn't understand disability,
that doesn't understand the issues, uh, sector,
our children, our families are facing.
Uh, and that's been quite clear to us that this,
this is happening, this is going on, that there's a lack
of understanding around
what an inclusive education looks like, uh,
and some real concern that
what is happening is a segregated curriculum rather than a
curriculum that is adapted for our disabled learners,
for our blind and low vision.
Um, it is, it is entirely possible to do it well.
Um, or we also obviously have examples of things done well.
Uh, and where things are done well is where educators
and the ministry and families are working together, um,
where they're, um, committed to, uh,
the child and committed to an inclusive education, uh,
and start asking questions around how do we make this happen
and how is it going to work
and how's it going to work for the child?
Um, one of the things
that we are really excited about is the potential
for this new framework for action.
Um, uh, it may not be perfect.
It may not be everything we want,
but it has potential to make an impact,
and it's certainly a step in the right direction.
Um, and that is why we were so surprised
that it wasn't included or referenced
or connected, um, in this new bill.
Uh, and, uh, that is concerning
that there is a lean back
to segregation rather than to inclusion.
And I think that's just about my 10 minutes.
Yes. Thank you very much, Rebecca.
We've got time for one very quick question from Lawrence,
and then we'll need to move on.
Oh, thank you so much. Uh, I guess you, you mentioned,
and you also mentioned the, the framework for action by IHC,
which is the end of last year.
Um, but can I just check, one
of the things you mentioned is the risk that a minister,
particularly like, let's say when it comes to curriculum,
make it curriculum decision without consulting,
do you foresee that as something that's happening
or likely to happen or has happened so often
that you just assume that it's gonna happen again?
I, we had started to move in terms
of the disability sector and, and inclusion.
We'd started to move towards something that was, uh,
potentially becoming more and more inclusive
and increasingly inclusive, um,
with the previous legislation, um,
and with the requirement for boards to be responsive to ity,
we were seeing skills implementing things
that actually benefit our disabled children
because it took a different lens and
because it was starting to think about inclusion
and that had a flow on benefit for disability, um,
in various ways, um, our concern is that A,
that requirement's been removed from the board.
And b, now with this focus, uh,
primarily on the high achieving learners, uh,
it is a very strong risk that the curriculum won't reflect,
local communities won't reflect, uh,
the actual students and the families.
And that leads to greater disengagement, uh,
for disabled learners as much as for anyone else.
Uh, but a, yeah, a real concern
that you could end up focused on subjects
that have zero relevance to life here in New Zealand
and zero relevance for our disabled learners.
Thank you, Rebecca. Thank you for your time this morning
and your contribution to this process.
Do appreciate it. Um, we'll, we moved it on now to, uh,
to AKA pmo, uh, and we have Bruce and Dr.
Trace Ford, Bruce Jepson, um,
but we have you for the following two submissions.
So, um, if we can get you both online
and turning your cameras on and audio
Oh, you are together.
Wonderful. We did one to that Kia.
If you have any efficiencies in the fact that you are, um,
submitting on two different submissions, um, one
after the other, then you're welcome to use that.
The time is yours. Um,
Kilda, we will be making, uh, two different submissions
because we're in the middle
of running the teacher only day at a secondary school.
So, um, Bruce needs to return to the group to carry on
that learning, but we'll get started on Taka.
Puma,
Um, members of the committee, um, Epson,
um, I'm the chair of AKA PMOs Steering Committee, uh,
AKA PMO was launched in September, 2025,
and as a national COPA and movement focused on protecting
and advancing t or ang in education.
Uh, the movement is about ensuring that the promises
of her Waka, PGA and titi are enshrined
and protected throughout their, the entire education system.
The name AKA Puma, was gifted to us by renowned Ranga
and Maori linguist.
Dr. Huta Mason aka refers
to a strong vine, which is capable
of binding separate entities.
And Puma PMO refers to a state of permanence.
This resonates with the intention of this collective,
which is to bring together iwi
and education leaders so that Titi of, um,
or Waitangi is kept safe within the education system
and is fixed so it cannot be removed.
For I am the national coordinator of AKA pmo,
as Bruce stated, AKA PMO is a collective of educators
who are committed to leading, teaching, governing,
and fundamentally living in ways that give active expression
to TE or tgi.
We want to stress that our collective is unique
because of the diverse
and inclusive nature of our membership.
Our uri, it's community includes iwi leaders
and iwi education leads, education,
peak body leads and representatives
and education leaders from across
sectors from both Maori and English medium settings.
We also want to explain
that education peak bodies are non-governmental membership
organizations that represent the collective interests
of specific subgroups within the education system.
These groups include education unions, subject associations,
and principal collectives.
Our group represents thousands
is the point that I wanted to make.
We gathered for an education summit in September
of last year because we were all concerned about the
quantity, quality
and pace of intervention change
that was being imposed on the education system
and ultimately on our children.
At this gathering, we recognize the very distinctive
demographic of our uri of our community.
We expected and celebrated the Maori
and non Maori combination
because ORI envisaged us working together
in mutually reinforcing ways.
However, iwi leaders
and education leads combining with pea bodies
and leaders from early childhood, primary school,
secondary school, and tertiary leaders
coming together collectivizing to protect
and advance in education for the first time
was quite historic.
This is the backdrop that sets the scene
for our oral presentation.
We present today on behalf of AKA PMO
to express our opposition to this bill,
and not merely as stakeholders, but as UA
and partners with an inherent
enduring responsibility for the education
and wellbeing of our udi who are our descendants.
Uh, we are here to voice our absolute
opposition to this bill.
It is not a system reform, let's be clear.
It's a systemic retreat from the constitutional foundations
of we wanna raise five key points
that are outlined in our written submission
and propose the associated implications.
The five key points, uh, as follows, one,
the constitutional tension regarding Tonga
verse crown control.
Two, the politicization of knowledge,
particularly in the curriculum.
Three professional standards
and the silencing of Maori educators for
governance and the risks of the charter model.
And finally, five, system monitoring
and cultural safety.
I'll start by explaining the constitutional tension, 10
Oranga versus crown control.
Firstly, this bill represents a breach of partnership.
It is a regressive return
to state controlled monocultural educational policy
by centralizing power in the minister's office.
That crown is unilaterally dismantling
shared governance arrangements
that have taken decades to build.
Secondly, we anticipate an erasure of ity.
Ity is the constitutional foundation
of this country, and it's not optional.
When you remove the requirement for school boards
to give effect to ity, you are not simply
simplifying legislation.
You are signaling that Maori rights to partnership
and active protection are no longer
a priority for this government.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the recolonizing
nature of this bill.
The cumulative effect of the changes, for example,
centralizing curriculum, the practicing teacher standards
and ignoring iwi voices mirrors 19th century policies
that sought to suppress Maori worldviews.
I'll pick up on our second point about the
politicalization of knowledge
and in particular, the curriculum.
Firstly, if we are worried about the ministerial overreach,
this amended bill represents under the proposed amendments
to Section 90.
A single minister can dictate what is taught
and how it is taught without any requirement
for curriculum review or advice from the ministry.
Secondly, our members, Maori
and non Maori, are deeply concerned about the threat
to Ma Maori.
This amendment creates an unprecedented risk
to the visibility of Ma Maori and Maori.
Our history and our language are Tonga,
that the crown is obligated to protect under Article two.
They should not be subject to the at will changes
or political whims of whoever holds the ministerial warrant.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the loss of local context,
which the previous presenter also alluded to
removing the flexibility for schools to design programs
around local iwi priorities.
And tikanga means our tamari lose the connection
between their learning and their ua.
Uh, I'll talk about, I now want
to discuss the professional standards
and the silencing of Maori educators.
Uh, there are two implications that we've identified
and experienced that need consideration.
Uh, the first one, uh, is the stripping of independence.
Shifting the power to set professional standards from an
independent democratically elected teaching council over
to the Ministry of Education
is a direct attack on professional autonomy.
The second is the marginalizing, uh, of Maori voice
and reducing sector representation on the teaching council,
uh, to just three members,
effectively silences Maori educators.
And it removes our ability to ensure that teaching standards
remain culturally responsive.
So how can the ministry, a political body,
be the arbiter of what constitutes quality teaching
for our learners, for our Maori learners?
For us,
Our final point relates
to system monitoring and cultural safety.
The amendment to this bill impacts mandatory settings.
The new powers to compel participation in system monitoring
studies opens the door to standard
standardized national testing.
Again, and this is concerning, who gets
to define success is also concerning.
Our community is concerned that allowing the minister
to set the parameters of success
potentially excludes Maori defined measures of achievement
and wellbeing for iwi, hapu, and whanau.
Success is not just a test score, it is health
of our language, the health of our identity,
and our connection to our iwi.
Thank you. That's all the time
we have for this submission.
Uh, we need to move on now to your next submission.
I think they're doing it. Thank you both.
Oh, they, I think they're doing it together. Are you both?
Sorry, I thought that, um, two separate.
Bruce was moving on.
Yeah, I'll, I'll, I'll be moving on. Oh, okay.
I'll bye. Okay.
Just you said there were two separate submissions,
so we've now started the who.
Absolutely. Absolutely. I don't need
to, um, introduce myself.
So I am gonna speak about, um,
UA and the oral submission.
Uh, and just to explain a little bit more about myself
and my role, I've got a background in English,
medium primary and secondary school teaching and leadership.
I've been a board member for 16 years,
and I'm also a researcher
and professional development facilitator.
It is my job to understand credible research pertaining
to teaching and leadership practices
that improve experiences and outcomes for learners.
And in particular, Maori learners who
for too long have been underserved by our education system.
Accordingly, the research we draw from in UA
to support leaders we work with is based on evidence
of effective leadership practices that are anti-racist,
decolonizing, and equity focused.
I present this submission on behalf of ua, a collective
of over 200 Maori education leaders.
Our group includes iwi leaders, researchers, principals,
and teachers who lead across the full spectrum
of our system, from ko, Maori
and FA Kura through to English, medium,
primary, and secondary schools.
Between all of us, we hold centuries of combined experience
and what it takes to enable Maori learners to thrive.
We haven't just read about education in a book.
We live it every day in our communities.
I'm here to express our unwavering opposition to this bill
that is the UA collective.
We view this bill not as reform,
but as systemic dismantling of Titi based progress
that we have spent decades building
based on our WR written submission.
I'll discuss four points specifically.
I'll talk about how the bill is a constitutional breach
because it mar generalizes, it represents, again,
the politicization of the curriculum.
It devalues the teaching profession
and it erases Maori voice.
The first point about con constitutional breach
and Maori marginalizing money Mar Maori tki,
the most fundamental issue is that the bill attempts
to overwrite the constitutional foundation of Altura,
the introduction of the Treaty of Wang Act in 1975,
and the establishment of the Wang Tribu in the same
year marked the beginning
of significant change in the education for over 50 years,
which is five decades and half a century.
Education leaders and teachers have worked
to shift the education system away from a colonial
one size fits all model to one grounded
and genuine partnership.
This bill reverses that it ignores the principle
of Maori authority by concentrating power at the
top with the minister.
The crown is essentially telling iwi
and Maori educators
that their voices are no longer required In the room
where decisions are made, we view this as a form
of recolonization.
It reinstates a model of control that assumes a minister
of education and the associated advisor who,
who associated advisors
or the associated advisors, who may not even be
of this land, know what's best for our tamari
and know it better apparently than their own whanau,
iwi and educators.
The 0.2 is about the politicalization of the curriculum.
I want to focus on the proposed changes
to the curriculum under section 90.
At present, curriculum design is a collaborative,
professional, and evidence-based process.
This bill seeks to replace the professional expertise
with a unilateral ministerial decree.
When the minister is granted the power
to set curriculum statements without expert advice
or consultation, ma Maori is placed at extreme risk.
Knowledge is not a political football.
Our histories and our worldviews should not be subject
to these kinds of shifts in a three year election cycle.
We are deeply concerned
that the centralized control will be used
to prioritize a Eurocentric view of knowledge,
effectively silencing local iwi
and local narratives that give our the sense
of identity and belonging.
We are worried about the devaluing
of the teaching profession.
While Hu consists of Maori leaders, we know that our
ti non Maori leaders are also worried about the extent
to which this bill devalues the teaching profession.
A high performing education system requires a profession
that is trusted and independent.
Yet this bill proposes to strip the teaching council
our independent professional body of its ability
to set the very standards that define our practice,
moving these functions into the Ministry of Education
as a direct attack on our professional autonomy.
No other high stakes profession like medicine
or law would tolerate their professional standards being
tick dictated by government department, the Maori educators.
Specifically, this is a double blow.
It removes independent oversight and ensures that success
and competency will be divided by, defined
by a political agenda rather than by cultural
and educational expertise in the sector.
We also need to address the shift from consultation
to not notification regarding the curriculum.
This might seem like a minor administration change,
but it's a major breach of trust.
For decades, Maori have fought
to have a seat at the table in developing curriculum
to ensure that what is taught
to our children reflects our values.
This amendment tells parents
and whanau, we will tell you what you are doing,
but we don't need your input.
This disregard for the rights of whanau
to be partners in the children's education is a front
to the process we've made
and building homeschool relationships that actually work.
In conclusion, who calls on this committee
to reject this bill in its entirety?
You cannot improve education by silencing people,
silencing the people who deliver it
and the communities who rely on it.
This bill erodes trust.
It undermines tei
and it risks long-term harm to Maori learners
and other learners from minority groups.
We urge you to hold this process
and instead commit to a reform path that honors
respects professional independence
and upholds the partnership that
represents Ra Koto.
Koto. Thank you for your time.
Uh, thank you. Todays we have, uh, time
for one very succinct question from
Lawrence. You've put your hand up
First. Cool Kia, thank
you. Um, uh, thank you so much.
Uh, but first of all, I think just wanted share our aha
with you and Bruce who are both based in Papamoa.
Um, in terms of the, you mentioned in terms of consultation.
So I guess one of the questions we had
before, previously is what sort
of consultation has taken place with any
of the organizations, or particularly with Hapu
and Iwi in the content of this bill?
And at what point do you think that
to exemplify genuine partnership,
that consultation stage should start
Kda Lawrence, thank you, um, for acknowledging, um, our,
the struggles and the challenges in
our community at the moment.
I appreciate that. Uh, I, I,
what I would say is I'm not sure about the extent
to which consultation is happening with Iwi and Hapu,
but based on our network, we understand very little,
and if I, um, compare our experiences
of the previous, um, work the way that we worked
with previous ministers,
and when I say we, I'm talking about ua, our collective
that represents Maori leaders and teachers throughout.
We were regularly working in partnership
and relationship with the Ministry of Education
and with other education leaders across the sector.
And we were active participants in the development of,
for example, the curriculum, the curriculum te the original
te uh, we have been locked out for want of a better word,
it would seem from that process.
We don't get an opportunity to, in the first instance,
talk about the work we did previously in the value of it
and how it can contribute.
And we have not been given any opportunity
as an organization to share
the perspectives of our members.
And it is a real concern, as I hope I've expressed in both
of our submissions.
Thank you. Theres, thank you for your time this morning.
We appreciate it up the best of the day.
We now we'll move to our short break.
Um, we'll resume at 10 20,
right?
We are back in session for this morning's hearing
and we are starting with New Zealand
School Boards Association.
We have Meredith Kennet with us on Zoom.
Meredith, if you can turn your camera on
and your audio on, we have great.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
and that includes time for questions over to you.
Fantastic. All right. Uh, good morning everyone.
Hopefully you've had a good break.
Um, excited to be here today on behalf of TGA ko,
New Zealand School Boards Association.
My name's Meredith, Meredith, Ken, I'm the president, um,
and excited to represent our members
and share some of the responses that I got from our survey.
So we did complete a written submission,
and in that we covered, uh,
principal discretion in which 84% of our members disagree.
With that being removed, we covered the requirement
to consult on the health curriculum, of which 67%
of our members do consult.
Um, 40% of them see a challenge in removing that, um,
for various different reasons.
Um, and then we also focused on changes to section 90,
the curriculum statements where 82% of our members disagree
with any member or any minister of education, being able
to set what and how the curriculum statements are.
But I wanna focus on a couple of other things today, things
that also came up within our survey,
how the first is the establishment
of the New Zealand School Properties Association,
and also the consistent comments around concerns
that our members have about process.
So, um, first off, in my position, in my position
as the president, I'm really privileged to get,
to spend time, uh, with people like, uh, Jerome, she,
who is the chief executive of the proposed N-Z-S-P-A,
and I've heard firsthand what they see their role is.
Uh, I am clear on what the problem is with school property.
I know what it is that they are trying to solve, um,
and I see that this agency can potentially solve many
of the issues that are arising in schools.
Removing a bunch of staff out of the Ministry
of Education into their own agency is a great idea,
and it will allow them to focus solely on school property
and will prevent schools being passed around
and around to many a different, uh, person in the ministry
and hopefully get things happening quicker.
Um, now I know that, and like my own experience, uh,
honor school board firsthand is that it took us 10 years
to get property delivered.
And, um, that was very frustrating.
So hopefully that will sort that out.
Now, I know that in my position,
but my members, um, raised a lot of, a lot of questions
and actually our members
and others in the, in the sector,
there is an overriding sense of suspicion when it comes
to the creation of this agency.
I get asked questions like, is this the beginning
of privatization of school property?
Will this remove or sense of local context to our schools?
Uh, where will the money come from
to fund N-Z-S-P-A demands on our school,
as is mentioned in the, in the bill.
So schools have, uh, a number of worries about that.
Um, and to me, this speaks of a sector
who has lost trust in the way
that education is being governed.
It's gonna be really cheeky micromanaged. Yeah.
And once N-C-D-S-P-A is up
and running, as I'm sure they will be, uh,
my biggest hope is
that the agency strongly focuses on consulting
and building relationships
with school boards across the country.
I would like to think that we school boards, uh,
should be considered a primary stakeholder
in relationship with them.
Uh, the other point that I wish to raise is that
during our survey, a number
of comments were made about the process
of these continuous amendments
and the integrity of the parliamentary process.
Our country has for a very long time,
like pretty much since the beginning of time, uh, had, uh,
a real strong trust in the integrity of the process.
Proposed amendments come in, submissions get made, uh,
committees meet, and you hear those submissions,
and then together you make recommendations, uh, to, to me
and to many in the country, that's a really great thing
because obviously you form a cross party view.
And to me, that represents, you know, a wide, a wide view,
a really well-rounded view,
and should be something that as a country we can trust,
we can expect those recommendations to be, you know, fit
for purpose and be included in any final bill
that is presented, uh, for reading Parliament.
But instead, it does seem
that these amendments are pretty much a done deal.
And for me, N-C-S-P-A is a really perfect example,
and not to throw them under the bus,
because I really do think, uh, potential of
that organization is a, a great go forward.
Mm-hmm. Um, but staff have already been employed.
There is already a board.
There is, uh, we are not waiting on this bill to pass
for it to be established.
It's pretty much a done deal.
So it does start to begin like
to feel like this is just a tick box activity.
And for school boards integrity of process, uh,
is at the heart of what we do.
That's how we run schools.
So how we govern schools is determined
by having good policy to follow.
And through consultation with our communities, setting, uh,
clear strategic priorities
and objectives, we stay out of the day-to-day.
It is not our area of expertise.
We are there elected to govern.
Uh, if a board member were to try
and tell a principal how maths should be taught next week,
uh, they would be very quickly invited back into your own
lane until the governance lane integrity
of process is everything in governance.
So, uh, it is really a, it's dangerous
for people in official roles to ignore
that democratic process, and that is a fear of our members.
So, uh, finally, just to, just to really reiterate, 82%
of our members do not support any minister of education.
Having the power to decide how curriculum is to be taught
and learn, it's not their main, uh, please leave that
to our education professionals.
Mm-hmm. Any questions?
Yes, we have one question from Lawrence Sunan.
Thank you. Thank you, chair.
Thank you so much for that submission, Meredith.
And I think the survey result is really interesting in terms
of what has come
to light from the school board, uh, members.
I, I wondered, um, again, you know, one
of the things you are a peak body of education, so one
of the questions we've been asking is what sort
of consultation you've had prior
to this on this particular bill, um,
but also considering that some of the data that you, some
of the survey result that you've had.
Uh, a follow up question would be,
what do you think then will be the challenge
for any government, not just this one, any government
that doesn't really have the confidence of the sector
to be able to undertake some
of the changes they're trying to make?
Great question. Um, so first, as a Peabody, no,
we had no consultation on the bill.
Uh, we have had opportunity to build relationship with, uh,
the New Zealand School Properties agency
and understand what they're doing.
Um, and maybe we've begun kind of conversations about how
that could work for school boards, which is great.
Um, but nothing else other than that.
Um, yeah, not that I can think of.
Um, and then regards to
how governments can build trust moving forward.
I think that really the key is to,
to come back to consulting.
I've heard many people talk about it this morning.
I know you've heard this over and over, um,
but our education professionals know what they're doing.
And, uh, to simply be ignored or, uh, gone around
and have all this stuff come out, I think is,
uh, it's concerning.
And it's, yeah, people are now just really losing trust
and really, um, becoming suspicious of anything,
even if it is a good change.
And look, there are some great changes
and there are some not so great changes,
but now it's all just going under a blanket of suspicion.
So I think back to consultation, back
to getting the guidance
and advice of the professionals in the sector
is a really great place to start. Thank.
All right. Thank you. No, that's all the time we
have with you today.
Thank you so much, very much, Meredith.
I appreciate you making yourself available
and being part of this process.
We will move on to Hugo Van Stratum who is on Zoom.
Hugo, if you can turn your camera on
and your audio, assuming you have accepted the invitation
to be a panelist, we have
five minutes with you today.
That includes time for questions.
Um, We can hear you. Hugo
Lost my video.
I had it there a minute ago. Sorry about that. Okay.
Um, where do I get the video to?
You can just start with audio.
We have limited time today,
so we are happy to hear you talk.
Uh, um, Kiara Select Committee.
Um, thanks for hearing me, Hugo Tao, 40 years at ko.
Um, I come to you as, um,
what Erica would say is a ca Kayako who she would like
to get rid of as not always achieving in all
areas of the curriculum.
Um, I'm a teacher when Aura
is overstaffed.
I'm the one selected to go.
I've been identifi identified as of concern.
I, um, I just need to say that there is always going
to be someone who's less able than others in the
education world.
It does not mean that the kayako having to go
is not committed to Teki and working hard.
I say that the less able we are, the harder we have
to work in teaching.
Those that are gifted with great reading
and writing skills can get through reports three times
as fast as I can.
It's a bit of a rocky road for me, um, in teaching,
um, in my first year.
Um, the inspector just
about disqualified me from becoming a teacher.
It was only, um, him listening
through the door while I read a story
that he decided he would pass me.
Many years later on a hospital visit, I met a woman
who I had taught as a 6-year-old in that first year,
she said, oh, she said, you are the best teacher I ever had.
Yeah. Well, I just wonder where is the balance to logic
and sense and what it means to be a good key, uh, teacher?
What is the, what is, um, a, a lot
of important things.
What are those important things to tiki learning
that are not tested in?
Um, the literacy a mass they always go for
to test children on.
When we were forced international standardization, te
teaching, it really sadden me that
every child had to be averaged.
It was me who always had the
noisiest classroom in the school.
Mm-hmm. I liked teaching math as it was logical,
but reading is not, it is more practiced that counts.
Um, being safe in the teaching workforce, we have
so many teachers saying, we need to help you.
We can't deal with this mix of tamaki
that we've got, I've got in the class.
And, um, they're not getting the help they need.
Um, and you think the,
um, fear for teachers if they're not achieving,
is not gonna help them in their achieving.
You can't have teachers who are fearful for their jobs, um,
performing at the best ability.
Stress is something children pick up on very easy.
Um, there's lots of things that are, are complex
and make teaching quite difficult, quite unsafe.
Like in the 1980s, um,
it was all about child abuse problems,
aka were not to be alone with the child.
It was the strangest of rules
because in practice we always had a child who's lasted
out the class or someone who wanted to, to come back in.
Um, you had to deal with
36 like I did at one stage,
36 new interns getting changed in the
classroom after swimming.
Um, you had, um, 6-year-old
timer pooing their pants that you had to clean up
and, um, so these rules
that came in at the time were not very suitable.
Hugo, thank you very much for your submission.
This is the time that we have available with you.
We do appreciate you making yourself, uh, available
to be part of this process.
And we'll have to move on now to our next submitter.
Yeah. Um, Thank you.
Um, can I just say, I have great boys at the time
that the teacher's council without, um, A CEO
and issues with the, um, the,
um, thank you.
Uh, not in a good position to support support. Um,
Can we, can we Thank you.
Thank you. Hug. Right, right.
We will move on now to Jesse Moss, who we have in person.
Thank you, Jesse. I see you've been with us,
uh, all morning just about.
So you know how this all goes. Time is yours.
Go for it. Yes. I have been here a long time this morning.
A good, um, end of school holidays activity for my girls.
And
I'm opposed to this bill.
I'm a registered primary teacher and a professional advisor,
and I speak today mostly in my capacity
as a primary school teacher and a parent.
The system of form bill arrived
unceremoniously in the middle of term four when
were writing their reports and planning for term one
with the new curriculum.
The summer break is not a good faith consultation time.
I'm really concerned that the people
who should be involved in this process
don't necessarily even know that this is happening.
And I'm really concerned that the people who will be most
affected by this bill also don't know
that this is happening.
This bill will centralize decision making
and give the current and future minister
of education unprecedented powers over what
and how our tamari are taught.
I believe this bill is a direct attempt to wrestle control
of the public education system from educators
and from the public for whom it is for to politicize it
and to open it up for private interests.
I'm really worried that the creation of state schools
of serious concern
for which we have no definition in this bill will allow
for the very kan schools that need the most support
to be scapegoated for learning
and achievement problems
that actually arise from societal issues
that these schools could indeed be forced into
charter school conversion.
I'm really supportive of measures
that increase support for cur in schools.
However, this must be done through collaboration and trust
and a willingness between schools
and the government to address the issues
that impact teaching
and learning The most school communities have been very
clear about what these issues are.
Broad consultations and such as the education conversations
and OECD data are clear on the issues, bullying, racism,
poor wellbeing, and a lack of student voice Among them.
Our TAM are living in increasing poverty
with insecure housing and Kai and equities are rising.
These are the issues that kura schools,
kindergartens early childhood centers in face every day.
And this bill does nothing to address them.
Akko and school leaders know what works.
They are clear that relational practices between kura
and whanau and the provision of things such as Kai
and resources increase attendance
and engagement reports put out
by NZCR last year detailed the connection between URA
and schools and through the teaching
of RO New Zealand histories, which increases learning
and engagement, that that curriculum has been scrapped
and indeed localizing curriculum has been removed
from the act.
Will a school that focus on these kind of measures
of success outside
of the narrow definitions in this bill be labeled a school
of serious concern?
What about a school where 30% of are on learning support
or are on the waiting list for it,
whose students don't fit all the narrow metrics of learning
and achievement to be assessed by Arrow,
but where the school carefully tracks their steady progress,
nonetheless, will they become a school of serious concern?
We don't know because the bill doesn't explain it.
The system reform amendment bill prioritizes systems
of compliance over the flexibility
and trust in the teaching profession required
for our public education system
to meet the needs of all learners.
The bill legislates to reduce akpo
and school leader ability to apply their professional
knowledge and discretion in their practice
through changing the definition of
what curriculum is, who sets it.
And by removing the professional functions
of the teaching council.
A professionally led self-governing education system has a
robust independent body free from political interference,
which would insulate the profession
and the learners from short term policy
policies for political gain.
A strong public education system in upholds
is child centered and trusts educators to get on
with their job of teaching.
I believe this bill puts all of this at risk.
I recommend to the select committee that you report
that the bill should not be progressed through the house
and instead that the minister should slow down.
And that along with the ministry work really hard
with the sector and with the stakeholders
who have been ignored in the process so far
to find solutions to the challenges
that the education system faces.
Thank you very much. We actually don't have any time
for questions, but we appreciate
your part, part of this process.
Thank you for bringing along.
Alright, we move on now
to the Auckland Kindergarten Association.
Okay. So we are moving on to clear Coleman,
or have we got Madeline Collins first?
I think clear fail, clear change anymore. Clear.
Hopefully you are, um, online and agile.
If we could get you to turn your camera on and your audio.
Um, wonderful. Dr.
Claire Coleman, thank you for making yourself available
to us, uh, this morning.
If you could. Okay. You're five minutes now. Thank you.
Thank you for your time today.
First, a poem back to basics.
Reading, writing, tests and facts.
Who could possibly argue with that would turn us
to a better time when all the world control was mine.
A lack of rigor is the key denying pesky equity.
Minorities stayed where they were placed questions,
opposition, never faced.
You have the answer and you are never wrong.
And by the time you are, you are gone. Ignorance is bliss.
Well, you would know, but be careful. Reap what you sow.
Hmm. I would like
to focus on the fundamental concern raised by the bill.
The shift of decision making powers from schools, teachers
and professional bodies to the central government
and the Minister of education.
A shift that demonstrates a lack of appreciation
for the importance of education
and its role in establishing, maintaining
and generating the society we want to live in.
Education is inherently political
because it's a reflection of that society who we want
to be in the world, not just who we are,
but who we want to become.
It is far more than reading, writing, maths, or the arts.
It cultivates our greatest asset, our future, our tamari,
and it deserves better education both within
school and beyond.
Is the space in which we can foster engaged citizens,
cultivate critical thought and build capacity to imagine
and enact a more just and compassionate future.
Education is not just a place to consider ideas, knowledge,
social, relationships, or even that vision.
It is also a place where young people can have agency
or suffer oppression.
They can claim their identity or feel lost.
They can be a bystander to life
or the narrator of their own story.
Education doesn't make for tidy election promises
or easy political victories.
It is too complex, too nuanced, and change takes too long.
It requires de decades of dedication, expert consultation,
and the passionate commitment of educators ready
to devote their entire careers to young people
who share a belief that they can make a difference.
This is why the government's authority
to make educational reforms right curriculums and change.
Educational systems needs to be tempered by the people
who are in it for the long haul.
The teachers, the schools, the academics, the experts,
her ni a Wales tooth
requires a whale's jaw.
Leadership must be matched with competence, accountability,
and the genuine will of the people involved.
I know from my recent experience at the Ministry
of Education, the dangers
of allowing a public service to be politicized.
As a curriculum writer, I was asked
to disregard the evidence, the research,
and decades of my own experience.
I watched colleagues run back
and forth to the beehive for approval, watched academics
and sector experts be removed from writing teams in favor
of corporate resource creators.
And for curriculum documents change radically over a matter
of hours in response to the latest red pen,
notes from ministers, public servants
and their expertise were routinely disregarded, bullied,
and removed for not aligning with a predetermined outcome.
Globally, we have seen the impact of unchecked power,
the lack of intellectual rigor, reasoned critical debate,
and democratic principles is might right?
Is this really what we want in our Tower of New Zealand?
And are we really going to support a move to entrench
through legislation?
The power of ministers to deliberately silence the voices
of professionals and experts about the thing they
know the most about?
We need to value experts. We need to collaborate.
We need to debate to disagree
and consider alternative views if only
to rigorously test the strength and quality of an argument.
If the ministers are as confident as they appear
to be about their decisions, why do they need
to force schools, principals, early childhood educators,
and the teaching council into compliance
through legislation?
I strongly oppose this bill and I encourage the minister
and its architects to reconsider these decisions.
The only way we're going to make sustained progress
and gains in education for all of our rah is when we listen
to the expertise and remember what we value,
which is surely people over profit
and democracy over authoritarianism. Thank you.
We don't have any time for questions, unfortunately.
Uh, thank you very much, Claire, on terrible mission
and being part of this process.
Terrible was it for us. Thank you very much.
We didn't care about parents. We will now move on
to the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions.
Uh, we have Melissa Ansel Bridges
and Jack Foster submitting via Zoom.
Uh, no doubt you've heard the instruction
and you've done this time before.
Wonderful. Here you are. 10 minutes is yours.
That includes time for questions over to you.
Oh, thank you very much. Kiata Coto.
Uh, my name's Melissa Ranel Bridges.
I'm the Secretary of the New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions, Koai Khi,
and I'm joined by my colleague Jack Foster from
our policy team.
Um, at the outset, I'd like to note that NZDI
and PPTA are unions affiliated to the New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions, and we fully support their submissions
on this bill too.
We oppose this bill.
We believe that this legislation risks politicizing the
education system by giving the minister power
to unilaterally change the curriculum.
And by stripping the teaching council of some
of its professional functions, the bill creates conditions
for regular upheaval in our education system,
which no one will benefit from.
This is not in the interests of students,
it's not in the interests of teachers,
and it's not in the interests of wider New Zealand.
So I'm gonna hand over to my colleague Jack Foster,
who is going to address four specific concerns
that we have with this bill.
The first being ministerial overreach on curriculum. Mm-hmm.
Secondly, the changes to the teaching council's composition
and functions, the asymmetrical treatment of charter school
reconversion, and lastly, the vague schools
of serious concern provision.
Jack, over to you. Thanks.
Thank you Melissa. And good
morning to the committee members.
So the first issue is the expansion of ministerial powers
around curriculum statements.
So the current act enables the minister
to set broad curriculum goals while the teaching profession
is able to determine, uh, how
to achieve those goals in diverse context.
And our view is that this strikes an appropriate balance
between democratic accountability
and professional expertise.
In our view, clause nine of the bill upsets this balance.
So it enables the minister
who may not have an education background
or expertise to prescribe not just the direction
of the curriculum, but exactly what is taught
and how it is taught.
And so this risks that the curriculum will evolve in a way
that is divorced from professional best practice
and the reality of the classroom, which
of course varies greatly, uh, from in different communities,
uh, due to the different socioeconomic contexts
and cultural contexts, um, of those communities.
It also risks politicizing the education system
in an unhealthy way.
So if minister, if the minister can dictate teaching content
and methods to score political points,
the the curriculum risks, um, becoming subject
to the electoral cycle, this will reduce teacher's ability
to apply their expertise and it means teachers
and students would be subject to more frequent instability,
which is not good for educational achievement.
So then the New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions recommends maintaining the current balance.
So the idea we should be striving
for in the education system is a relatively stable
curriculum with widespread buy-in from the teaching
profession and the wider community.
The bill takes us in the opposite direction.
So the second issue is the changes the bill makes
to the composition and functions of the teaching council.
So clause 33 increases the proportion
of ministerial appointees on the teaching council relative
to those elected by teachers themselves.
So the ministerial appointees will now be a majority
Clause 36.
Then strips the council of the important functions
of setting criteria for teacher registration,
establishing standards for teaching qualifications
and ongoing practice,
and maintaining a code of conduct for teachers.
These changes reduce the ability of teachers
to have a voice in the regulation of their profession
and further concentrate power in the hands of the minister
to now view it as important
that teachers retain an effective hand in determining the
regulation of their profession to ensure
that the workforce regulation actually reflects the reality
of the classroom and the changing educational needs
of students, therefore, oppose these amendments made
by the bill to the teaching council.
So the third issue I'd like to speak
to is the further development of charter school provisions.
So the New Zealand Council of Trade Union supports
legislating a clear process
for reconverting charter schools back into state schools.
However, we are not satisfied by the process
outlined in clause 25 of the bill and elsewhere.
This is because it is asymmetrical with the process
for converting a state school into a charter school favoring
the continuation of a charter school.
So there are three particular issues here.
So the first is that staff at a charter school
that is reconverting
and not guaranteed continuity of employment in the same way
that they are when the process is reversed.
So this exposes workers to a potentially prolonged period
of job and security.
And there is also the risk that if reconversion
to a state school is happening
because of funding concerns at the charter school staff
would be left short of redundancy and holiday pay.
This needs to be addressed. Second, the new section, um,
212 ZDA prioritizes finding a new sponsor when a
charter school terminates its contract.
And only when no suitable replacement sponsor can be found
is the school to be reconverted back to a state school.
Our view is that the default setting should be instead
reconversion to a state school.
The justification for converting a state school
to a charter school in the first place rests
with this specific case proposed
by a sponsor and their supporters.
If this original sponsor terminates their contract,
then it would seem the justification
for conversion is no longer valid.
The third concern here is that an application
to convert a charter school, oh, sorry, application
to convert a state school to a charter school can be made
by a single member of the community with the support
of the proposed sponsor or at the minister's direction
by contrast and very concerningly, there remains no avenue
for communities or the minister to apply directly
for a ch a charter school
to be reconverted back to a state school.
This needs to be remedied.
The final area I'll speak briefly to is the concept of, uh,
state schools of serious concern
that the bill introduces in the new sections one 70 A to C,
and we are concerned by the vagueness, um, of this concept.
So there's no definition
provided in the bill as to what would constitute a school
of serious concern
nor what the criteria, uh, would be to form such a judgment.
Uh, nor is there any explanation
provided in the explanatory notes setting out
what this concept is intended to achieve.
And there also does not appear to be a regulatory,
Have we lost potentially
This amendment.
So this all from the sponsoring minister on this aspect
of the bill and what it is meant to achieve.
Thank you, uh, for the opportunity to speak.
Wonderful, thank you.
Uh, we have time for hopefully two very succinct questions.
We've got Willow, Jane, first
Kra, thank you very much for your,
uh, excellent submission.
Uh, the points you make are making are really clear.
I wanted to pick up on the point about no prior warning
or consultation
or such a significant change to the teaching profession.
Um, could you please elaborate on that?
And also you make a point about in particular curriculum not
having any, uh, regulatory impact statement
for such a significant change.
Can you please speak to those two points?
Sure. So to the first point, um, I mean the, the name
of the bill is, uh, the, is the education
and training system reform amendment bill.
So if you're reforming the system, uh,
that some some fundamental parts of
how the education system works, you would hope that, uh,
the necessary stakeholders, uh, engaged from the outset.
So, um, in particular teachers, um,
and the communities that schools are embedded in.
So our understanding is that this didn't happen prior
to the development of the bill.
Uh, and then, um, there's also the problem of the fact
that the consultation period was done basically
over the holiday break.
Um, we know that teachers are on holiday during that period.
It's a very busy, as, as you know, most workers are.
Um, it's a very busy period for people.
Um, it's highly unlikely that, uh, those people
who have a real stake in the system, um,
and might be very concerned about, um, the direction
of this bill would be able to, um, submit.
Um, some of them may not even know it's happening.
Um, so yeah, that's, uh, that's a,
a big concern from our perspective.
And it's, to be honest, it's been a bit
of a pattern we've seen, um,
with legislative amendments made, um, in the last couple
of years, uh, that, um, important pieces of legislation, um,
have, uh, inadequate, um, submission timeframes.
Um, sorry to the second part of the question,
would you just be able to remind me what, uh,
Just the lack of, um, regulatory impact,
a regulatory impact statement
and you point out for curriculum changes in particular
where it's pretty significant, um, change
and that there is no regulatory impact
statement. So did you
Want to elaborate on that?
Uh, yeah. I mean, there to be the only point
of elaboration there I'd like to make is that it's just, uh,
we, we think it's poor policy making practice.
Um, the regulatory impact statements are there for a reason.
They're there so that officials can surface with, uh,
government ministers, um, the potential costs
and benefits of making a change.
Um, and it's important those costs
and benefits are understood not just by the ministers, um,
and cabinet, but also by the wider public.
Um, and so in lieu
of providing a regulatory impact statement,
it's a lot harder for stakeholders.
Um, or it's a lot harder for ministers
to make good decisions and it's a lot harder
for community stakeholders to make good decisions
because they're not, um, available
with the proper information.
Right. That's all we have time for, unfortunately.
So thank you very much for making
yourselves available to us.
Thank you. This process.
We'll move on now to Madeline Collins, uh,
hopefully online and ready to go.
We have five minutes with you, Madeline.
Uh, time includes questions.
Kia. Um, my name's Madeline Collins.
I am a secondary school teacher in a very
standard West Auckland, um, school.
I have been teaching for 28 years
and I was also the reci.
Yeah, you can see evidence in the background.
Um, I was the recipient
of the 2023 New Zealand Prime Minister's
Science Teacher Prize.
I've contributed to education, um, at all levels of,
um, education.
And I have also delivered a lot of professional learning to
teachers right across them or to, um, in the last 15 years.
So that gives me a lot of experience
and understanding of not just
how the education system works,
but actually what is required from a bill like this being
passed curriculum being written to what that, um,
looks like for teachers in the classroom every day
and the amount of work required.
And it's from that perspective that I have huge concerns
with this bill, and I oppose it entirely
and recommend that it be thrown out.
Um, I oppose all of the amendments
that I've that are in the bill.
There was not one that I read that I agreed with,
but the areas that I would like to talk
to the most are the ones that
directly affect teachers every day, which first
of all is the curriculum.
We've seen draft curriculum come out last
year and the year before.
They've been changed frequently for English and maths.
They've been delayed for all of the other learning areas,
and they have been put out with very little consultation
and minimal time to trial, um,
and then give feedback
with further consultation to these curriculum.
There seems like there's a real rush on these processes.
And handing ministerial control
to the curriculum writing process, which this bill would do,
would speed up the, um,
the change in curriculum even further than what's happening.
It takes a lot of hours time, um,
energy thought consultation within a school to
change what's in a curriculum document
to engaging relevant lessons for our, um,
and if the curriculum is changing frequently
or is, um, has ministerial control is politically driven,
that makes it extremely difficult for teachers to be able
to do a good job at what we're experts in.
Um, often teachers are called scientists
or, um, mathematicians or artists.
They're not, they're teachers. We're all educators.
We just happen to specialize in an area.
We're experts at education
and we are not consulted in this process
that we've been trained for
and have been doing all of our lives.
Um, and there's not time to consult on the changes
that are happening, um, that are coming through.
Um, the other big aspect that with the bill
that I have a problem with, um,
and I oppose is the ministerial control
of the teaching council.
Um, to take the,
the authority from the independent body
and give it so much more political control, um,
is feels like a direct attack on our profession
and our capabilities as educators and experts in our field.
It removes a lot of our ability to consult with community
and whanau in terms of how we teach the people in our area.
Um, and again, removes relevancy
and engagement from our learners.
Um, and there's so much evidence that links that relevancy
and engagement to, um, improved success and achievement.
Um, there seems to be quite a lot of conflict of interest
and lack of transparency in this whole process.
It was, uh, the main, um, bill was delivered
and consultation process over time when teachers simply
don't have time or energy to engage in it.
Um, and many of us didn't even know it was occurring.
Again, I want to really highlight
that the changes in this bill are going to increase workload
and reduce autonomy for teachers,
for the experts in education without consultation of us
as experts in education.
And so I do not support,
support any amendments in this bill.
Um, there needs
to be a lot more consultation in the whole process
and I recommend that it is thrown out.
Thank you, Madeline. We don't have time for questions,
but thank you for making yourself available
to us this morning and being part of this process.
We move on now to, uh,
New Zealand Maori Principles Association appears we have
Bruce JSON back with us, uh, Ronald Nolan Waka
and Tracy Fraser.
Uh, on Zoom,
Uh, this morning we represent ta, the National
Maori Education leaders.
Uh, we represent and to Maori responsible
for the 97% of Maori TAM
in English medium education.
I ask that our written submission
provided by our CEO Bruce Jepsen be taken as read.
We stand here in absolute opposition
to the system reform bill.
To be blunt, this bill is a project of recolonization.
It trades decades of progress
and equitable led partnership for a model
of centralized Eurocentric control
that marginalizes Maori authority
and reverses decades of progress toward an equitable system.
Got it. Trace. The first point, uh, we'd like
to raise is the erosion of Ranga.
For over 30 years, Tate has advocated for Maori
to enjoy success as Maori.
This bill does the opposite.
By centralizing power within the ministry's office,
the crown is moving from a model of genuine partnership
to one of unilateral authority.
We explicitly reject the bill's attempt
to appoint Crown designated spokespersons to speak.
For us, Genuine partnership requires aa,
the right formal Maori
to control our own educational aspirations.
This minister's driven top-down approach removes their
professional autonomy of those actually doing the mahi.
In Alura, you cannot achieve efficiency
by marginalizing the very leaders with actual expertise
and skill in the profession who also hold the trust
of their communities.
So we must be clear.
Appointing crown selected spoke persons is no substitute
for authentic Maori leadership.
For the last two years, our educators have dealt
with unpredictable changes with minimal consultation,
leaving them feeling undervalued and unsafe.
This bill doubles down on that top down approach,
dismantling the essential checks
and balances that protects our kura.
Uh, and the second point is threats to MAGA
and whanau trust.
Successful education
for Maori depends on localizing knowledge,
and yet this bill grants the minister unilateral authority
to issue curriculum statements without
mandatory consultation with iwi or Maori experts.
This is an encroachment on Mato Maori
and furthermore, changing the requirement to consult
whanau to merely informing them
regarding the health curriculum as a breach
of the school community partnership.
By stripping away parents' rights
to participate in their children's educational direction,
you're eroding the very school community Relationships
that support student success.
Whanau are not spectators. They are essential partners.
Evidence shows that when we ignore local voice,
we increase the risk of punitive measures
like rigid attendance rules that fail
to understand the cultural context of aana,
which ultimately further alienate our
Maori learners from the system.
It is the right of Maori to deliver education
that reflects our specific worldviews.
And yet this bill silences local iwi
and expert voices in favor of political interference.
K. The third point we'd like to make is
around the protection of MuTu, the teaching Council.
We must address Tu New Zealand Teaching Council
by transferring professional standards setting from the
Independent teaching Council to the ministry
as purely a power grab that politicizes our profession.
We also strongly oppose transferring the power
to set professional standards from the teaching
council to the ministry.
This moves risks turning teaching into an ideological tool
rather than a profession governed by educational expertise.
The standards of our Kaiko bus remain independent
of the political cycle.
To maintain the integrity of our profession,
teachers must be governed by educational expertise
and cultural competencies, not the political ideology
of the Minister of the day.
No other profession would accept such direct political
interference in their standards or practice.
And, uh, so in summary, this bill promises reform
but delivers marginal marginalization.
It is an unsafe piece of legislation that ignores
what has worked in the past local solutions,
which the original version is what we're referring to
before the minister butchered it and took it offshore
and appropriated it professional independence
and TE led partnership.
So we urge this committee to one,
withdraw the bill in its current form two,
restore statutory requirements for robust whanau
and community co consultation, not just notification.
And third and three, retain the independence of the
New Zealand Teaching Council
to protect the integrity of our profession.
And we are happy to take questions.
Thank you. We Have a question from Willow Jane,
and we'll see that we have time
for our second question from Lawrence.
Uh, Tina Cord, thank you very much
for your submission today.
Uh, I note that you talk about the 97%
of our a Maori who are in English medium education.
We have the minister currently consulting on
curriculum documents.
She talks about addressing the equity gap
through things like teaching of a knowledge rich curriculum
grounded in the science of learning,
whose knowledge, whose science.
Can you speak to your concerns if you have them around, uh,
the current curriculum that is going through
and how that may support the statements
that you are making about the concerns you have
with the minister's ability
to dictate curriculum statements?
Well, looking just briefly, uh, if we look at just one,
uh, one part of it, uh, the original tip of
wasn't based on the, the science of learning.
It was based on, uh, and,
and, and, and, uh, around looking specifically
around our relationship with tei.
So to answer your question around, uh,
what are our concerns, for example, just one small one,
but a huge difference when you're looking at the, the,
the amount of time that's been given to the learning areas.
So de Maori
and the English medium curriculum sits under,
uh, under learning languages.
So when you look at the time allocation for that,
it's like 0.5 of an hour.
All the other areas, the learning areas have been given big
chunks of time, uh, Maori, uh,
you know, in terms of, of, in terms of our connection
with our iwi, our raco, all of the learning
and our context of learning, particularly for our Maori, uh,
90% percent Maori students in English medium, we can't do
that in 0.5 of an hour.
You know, that's, it's got a tiny little bit of time,
all the other areas, and that's just one thing.
Mm-hmm. Um, there's no, you know,
we're trying to squash that out.
We're trying to squash out today on Maori.
We we're trying to squash out, uh, our relationships
with Hapu and Iwi and those connections
and our P dako that our curriculum
has been based on previously for English medium.
Um, that's just how can we do that?
How can we, how can we, uh, strengthen, continue
to strengthen our relationships with our iwi, our hapu
if there's no time given to it in the actual, uh,
time tabling of, of minutes and seconds
and hours within this framework.
That's just one example. There's many,
but I just, that, that's just one practical one.
Thank you very much both of you.
We don't have any time for further questions.
Appreciate your participation in this process
and making yourselves available to us this morning.
We will move on now to Catherine Halls who is on Zoom.
Uh, Catherine, hopefully you can accept the request
your panel member, turn your camera on, your audio on,
and then we have five minutes with you.
And, sorry, Kate,
Sorry for the slight delay there.
My computer chose now
to run updates because of course it does.
Um, comedy United Kingdom of au, uh, care to Tini.
Um, thank you for making the time
for me to speak to you today.
Um, I've obviously already sent in a written submission
and I thought long and hard about what to say at this point.
And what I'd like to do is shared a bit of about
how I trained as a teacher in the UK
and how I came to be a teacher in New Zealand,
what the differences in those processes were
and why the differences between those are making me
so nervous and so anxious about some of the changes
that are being proposed in this bill.
Um, in 2005, I started my teacher training in the uk.
I was a highly academic child.
If the concept had existed in the uk,
I would've been the ducks of my year.
13. I hold three graduate
and postgraduate degrees from a top 10 university in the uk.
Um, I've never struggled
with anything academically in my life,
but my teacher training was a horrendous experience.
And 18 months later, by the time I'd finished, uh,
my health, my self-esteem
and my confidence lay in absolute ruins.
Um, it was an experience filled with criticism,
with judgment and overall with fear.
And a large part of this was that during that time, uh,
the schools, I was training at three, uh, inspections
by the office for standards in education,
more commonly known as Ofsted in the uk.
Um, I use fear as a word of description,
and I'm not exaggerating.
The whole school came to a halt
and the people that I was working
with are absolutely terrified of these inspections.
Uh, by the time I was finished,
I thought I would left teaching for good.
I had no confidence in my ability to teach,
and I did not think I would ever return to the profession.
Three years later, with a lot of encouragement
and a lot of recovery, I returned to adult education
and I worked with adults ranging from age 16 to 64
who had left school without
qualifications in maths and English.
There are a lot of those in the uk,
but when I left in 2017, the figures were
that one in three people left school
with no qualification in maths
and one in four left school
with no qualification in English.
My students had a 100% failure rate on entry to my courses.
By the time they left, they had a 90% pass rate.
There was no problem with my student's ability to learn,
and it turned out there was no problem with my ability
to teach, but I,
and they had both been failed by the UK education system.
In 2017, my husband and I decided to move to New Zealand,
and I completed the teacher education refresh
through the University of Waikato.
I was really nervous about returning
to high school teaching,
and I commented to my tutor
that I was worried I'd feel like a fish out of water
after I came and did the four week placement in Hamilton.
The same to tutor told me you were not a fish out of water,
but you were definitely a fish in the wrong ocean.
You should have been down here in the Pacific
because this education system is going
to work really well for you.
Because it was centered on care.
It was centered on putting the person first
and that the learning would fall outta
that wellbeing approach.
I came to the West coast in 2018.
I'm still at the same school now,
and my career has flourished and I firmly believe it's
because of the high trust model
that the New Zealand education system
currently has in place.
When we had our first e inspection at my high school
in vast contrast to the offset inspection,
I didn't realize it had happened until it was over.
And that is the way that it should be.
Not weeks of dread and fear
and scrambling for pieces of paperwork, just the ability
to go and do your job
and do the best Matthew that you can do,
and then not to be afraid of
what the outcome is going to be.
The bill's proposals fill me with fear.
I've never made a submission like this
before, a select committee before,
but I feel that if I don't speak up now,
I will regret it forever.
Mm-hmm. Um, the proposed changes alongside the curriculum
and assessment changes signal a shift in New Zealand
education away from this responsive
and high trusts model that I have seen work so successfully
to the rigidity and micromanagement
and repeated experience of failure for both teachers
and learners, which drove me
and all of my ad adult students in the UK into the ground
and ultimately drove me out of the country.
The bill removes the decision making capacity,
the standards, and the criteria from education professionals
and places them in the hands of people who are enthralled
to the UK education system, which I know to be dangerous
and damaging and only serving to an academic elite mindset.
The proposed reforms to ERO
and their ability to judge schools as being
of serious concern is extremely worrying to me.
This was the system that led to the destruction of my health
and my self-esteem, and nearly led
to me leaving the profession for good.
Removing the criteria and standards that we are judged
by from the teaching Council
and placing them in the hands of a ministry
that I believe is guided by misguided ideologies will lead
to a low trust model of practice, which is destructive
to teachers and students alike.
This bill is in the process of dismantling a vast amount
that I love and value about the New Zealand
education system.
I moved here because of the differences in this system,
and now it is being interchanged into a system
that resembles the one
that I moved 12,000 miles across the world to get away from.
I have to speak now. Thank you for listening to me.
Thank you, Kate. We haven't got any time for questions,
but we do appre appreciate your participation in this
process, making yourself available to us this morning.
Thank you. Uh, our next submitter is in the room.
We've got Qla Wong on behalf of the Opportunities party.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning. Yeah. Yes.
Please take a seat at the table.
Uh, 10 minutes includes time for questions and thank you.
Over to you. Morning Koto. Thank you for having me.
Um, thank you for the opportunity today to speak
to our submission on the education
and training amendment bill.
Um, the Opportunity Party exists for one fundamental reason
to ensure every New Zealander has an equal shot at pursuing
their potential, not just the lucky ones,
not just those born into the right postcodes
or the right families, but every single Kiwi.
This isn't about tinkering at the edges or managing decline.
It's about addressing challenges at their root.
And that's exactly the lens
through which we've examined this bill.
Our approach to this bill reflects three core principles
that define who we are.
First, evidence over ideology, we support reforms that work,
not reforms that sound good.
That means demanding proper regulatory impact assessments
and listening to them meaningful cons, consultation
with those closest to the issues,
and learning from what actually happens in classrooms
before we scale up experiments across the country.
Second, trust and professional judgment.
Within clear accountability frameworks.
We believe in setting higher standards
and being ruthless about outcomes,
but we also recognize that principals, teachers,
and local communities understand their students' needs
better than central government ever will.
Third, long-term thinking over short-term politics.
Real change in education takes years,
even decades to manifest.
We are not interested in quick wins that make
for good headlines, but fail our children.
The bill has some merit.
We support better data,
we support stronger professional standards,
and we support accountability for outcomes.
However, in too many areas,
this bill substitute central control
for professional judgment rules, for pr, for principles
and political convenience for evidence-based reform.
Take attendance exemptions.
Chronic absenteeism is a crisis,
but the solution isn't rigid.
Bureaucratic rules that strip principles
of professional discretion
and carry a high risk of further isolating families
who are already struggling.
Principals know their communities
and that contextual judgment matters on charter schools.
We are not opposed to innovation,
but we are opposed to scaling up an experiment
before we know if it's even worked.
The, the pre previous iteration showed considerable flaws.
The current one hasn't run long enough for a single cohort
to pass through yet this bill wants to expand now,
and we see that as ideology based policy rather
than evidence-based policy.
When charter schools fail, the,
the default should be reverting to the public system
with educational, educational continuity,
not lengthy negotiations
because students deserve stability, not experiments.
On system monitoring studies.
While we support data collection to inform future policy
and investment, the regulatory impact statement was clear
that the burden would fall disproportionately on schools
and teachers while the benefits accrue at a system level.
If it's a system obligation,
then it should be funded as one.
And the teaching council changes do trouble us deeply too.
When we shift standard setting powers from an independent
professional body to the secretary for education,
we politicize the profession.
Teaching quality is the most important in-school driver
of student outcomes.
And undermining that professional ownership
of standards undermines outcomes for our kids.
There's potential in the property agency
proposal if done well.
It could genuinely reduce workload and improve maintenance,
but that is a big, if
that entire depends entirely on proper resourcing
and meaningful consultation.
Finally, I want to talk about process
because process matters.
A wide ranging bill affecting every school in New Zealand
deserved proper consultation.
Instead, we got a short submission deadline over summer
holidays and reg regulatory impact statements that failed
to meet basic standards.
That's not how you build sustainable reform.
That's not how you bring communities along with change.
And that's not how the opportunity party believes
policy should be made.
Good policy requires deep engagement, robust evidence
and humility about what we don't know.
This Bill's development process showed
insufficient amounts of all three.
The opportunity party supports ambitious education reform.
We believe New Zealand can
and should have a world class education system
that serves every learner regardless of their background.
But that requires getting the fundamentals right, evidence
before expansion, allowing for professional government with,
uh, judgment within accountability frameworks,
proper resourcing for system level, level obligations,
protection for students when experiments fail,
and genuine consultation with communities.
These shouldn't be seen as obstacles to reform.
They're the foundations of sustainable reform.
Our children deserve an education system built on evidence,
trust and long-term thinking.
They deserve equal opportunity to pursue their potential,
not equal exposure to policy experiments.
That's what our submission calls for
and that's what the opportunity party stands for.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
We have a question from Lawrence.
Thank you. Thank you so much for coming.
Um, just wondering, you've heard just
before from Tia Mm.
Um, what is your view on the sidelining of
Ang within this legislation?
Because that's not well as, as far
as I can see in your submission. Mm-hmm.
Uh, so as a party we view Teti as a founding document
of our country and a contract that needs to be upheld.
Uh, and we would support, um, maintaining,
maintaining reference to teti in this, in this legislation.
Um, uh, partly
because it is, it is an obligation, uh,
contractual obligation for us to uphold that commitment.
Um, and because the te Maori principles are beneficial
to all New Zealanders, whether they are Pake Maori, um,
or, you know, come from from other
countries to come and live here.
Thank you. Right. Thank you very much.
It appears we have no further
questions from the committee. Do
We have more time? We have
Very short amount of time if you have a succinct question.
Yeah, sure. Um, I have seen some people, oh, in fact,
actually the minister is not interested in talking
about, um, process.
She, you know, thinks that that's not important.
More the substance of what is being proposed.
You mentioned that in your submission.
Can, um, can you elaborate on, um,
the process point that you are making?
Absolutely. I mean, in my experience,
and granted it comes from the private sector,
but change is about bringing people with you.
And regardless of what that change is, um, whether
that's something, whether it's highly contentious
or you think everybody agrees with you, um, that process
of engaging people is important.
Um, particularly when it comes to things as, you know,
as big as education system reform.
That is the foundation of productivity
and healthy communities in our country.
Uh, and if we don't follow good, um, sufficient process
that cons, consults with communities
and the profession properly, um, you know, we risk, uh,
leading down the road of more political flip-flop, um,
you know, people that will undo this legislation in future.
Um, we need to come to a point
where we can largely agree on the direction of something
as big as our education system.
And so, does it concern you that, uh,
submitters today from peak bodies, um,
from the teaching sector, teachers themselves have said
that they haven't been consulted in the
development of this bill?
Yeah, I mean, teachers that we have spoken to, um,
in reference to preparing our submission, uh, highlighted
that they felt the submission period was over one
of their busiest periods of the year.
Um, and so while they were given, um, you know, there was,
there was time to submit, it was one
of the most challenging times for them
to prepare a sufficient response to some quite big reforms.
All Thank you very much. Uh, thank you
for making yourself available
and being part of this process.
Appreciate it. Got it. Thank you.
Um, we will move on now to teacher Education forum,
our tier New Zealand, uh, Dr.
Jane Major appearing on Zoom.
Jay, if you've been listening, uh,
turn your camera on and your audio.
There you go. Wonderful. Uh, you have 10 minutes.
That includes time for questions. Um, as yours now,
QDA ko, um, it's a pleasure to be here.
My name is Jay Major.
I am the, I work at, uh, the University of Canterbury.
Um, but I'm here in my role as, um, the chair
of the executive of the Teacher Education Forum for
New Zealand, which is peak body representing initial teacher
education providers.
I did see sitting in the background
with the previous submitter, um, two
of my colleagues on the, um, executive.
And I just want to tu um, two summers
and Rose Meri, who I know are going
to be talking to you shortly.
Um, thank you for this opportunity to, uh, to speak
and make an oral submission.
I'm working on the assumption
that you have read the submission that we sent.
Um, and so I just want to highlight a couple of key points,
um, and then, um, open for, uh, questions or, or comments.
Um, I want to follow up with a, the previous submitter who,
or, um, who talked about the lack of consultation.
And that's obviously been a theme possibly
for other submissions.
And it's really my starting point is the lack
of consultation on the changes proposed, um, is one
of our key concerns.
The focus of our submission was about the proposal to,
uh, lift and shift or to move the responsibility for setting
and monitoring the teaching standards from the teaching
council to the Ministry of Education.
Um, and, uh,
this has been done without any consultation.
Um, I, we feel it's a change
that's not well founded in the evidence.
Um, and there's nothing that we can see in the material
that's been, uh, proposed that suggests that
this change moving the responsibility from one organization
to another will actually make any difference.
Um, we are concerned that, uh, the sorts of changes
that might be made to the teaching standards, uh,
could be quite problematic, um,
particularly if they were made with a lack of consultation.
That has been the experience so far.
Um, again, there was some reference in the previous speaker
to, uh, that is the first teaching standard.
Um, currently, uh, we would be extremely concerned if
that was to be, uh, removed or changed substantially.
So we feel, first of all, that the rationale is faulty.
Um, that, uh, that initial teacher education
is a complex, uh, beast.
It's a complex, it's complex work that we do.
And, um, the, the proposal
to move one significant part of our mahi, um,
is problematic
and will have, um, I think unintended negative consequences.
The, the, this proposal to lift
and shift the responsibilities from teaching council
to the ministry was first proposed back in 2024.
And a lot of responses have been made in, in, in regard to
the, uh, issues that the minister raised at that point.
Um, but no time has been allowed for the changes
that are underway, um, to show any effect.
So we feel that this is a very premature proposal and,
and should be, um, removed from the bill.
Um, separating teaching standards
and the setting of teaching standards from the review
and monitoring of teacher education programs adds, uh,
quite a considerable burden
to initial teacher education providers.
Uh, both, um, in terms of administration
and financially takes us away from the, the work
that we feel really passionate about, um, without any
discernible positive, um, results.
Um, we are concerned about the political interference in a
professional body like the teaching Council,
and we feel that this is, um, problematic
and kind of insulting to the teaching profession as a whole,
that, uh, it's not trusted, um, along
with teacher education providers to, um,
to be effective in doing this work.
Um, and it substantially ignores the complexity
of initial teacher education, which is multifaceted.
And if there are issues, it needs multifaceted solutions,
not a single, uh, idea that
doesn't have good foundation, um, in, uh,
in evidence that it's going to make any difference.
Um, so for example,
included in the submission was suggestions around the, uh,
induction of mentoring, um, programs, uh,
for mentoring new teachers.
Um, the, there's no, um,
acknowledgement of the increased complexity of
what new teachers face in the classroom.
Um, and that's beyond
what many experienced teachers also feel confident, um,
and capable of addressing.
So we feel that, uh, uh, simply changing
where the teaching standards are set
and what those teaching standards consist of is not going
to make a substantial difference to, um, the,
the confidence and capability of new teachers in particular.
Um, it's much more complicated than that.
More support is needed for beginning teachers,
and in fact, arguably for all teachers
because of the complex challenges that they face in terms
of student needs, behaviors, contextual elements, the role
of digital technology wellbeing, and so on.
I would also note that these matters are
not unique to New Zealand.
Um, so there's a need to nuance, um,
our understandings about
and conversations, um, in this regard.
And we feel that there's been a lot of very negative, um,
rhetoric, um, about teachers teaching
and teacher education that, um, is unhelpful
and doesn't give us confidence in the sorts of decisions
that are being proposed here.
I'd also finally note
that the teaching standards are designed
for practicing teachers, not specifically for new graduates.
And the expectation is that they will be met
with support in the first years of teaching.
So, um, I'm, uh, I think it's important to realize that, uh,
all teachers, all new teachers need support,
and there will be a variety of feelings of confidence
and adequacy at the start of what is a very complex
and demanding, um, career.
So I'll stop there, um, and leave time for any comments
or questions that may come from the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jay. Uh, look,
we may only have time for one question.
So I'm just gonna start with Grant
seeing as Lawrence and Willer.
Jane have had a good whack at the questions.
Yeah, I thank you for your submission.
Um, my concern that I raised earlier is we talked terms
of teacher standards and the ability
and the confidence of new teachers to teach maths,
particularly in primary school.
It's been highlighted as a real issue.
In fact, 25% of new primary school
teachers have failed level
to achieve level in one maths, NCA.
Do you think that's acceptable for the teachers?
That is, how is that gonna help a teacher
have the confidence to teach math if they
can't pass level one?
And surely the teacher council's job is
to help make sure those standards are met so the teachers,
people that come through the system
actually come into the classroom
with at least having the ability
to teach maths at that level.
Yeah. Okay. Um, thank you Grant.
Um, so I would say that what's happened in the last, uh,
year is the introduction of, um, the literacy
and numeracy, um, adult assessment tool has been, um, is,
is now in place as a mandatory, um, uh, assessment
that all new, uh,
student teachers coming into initial teacher education must
pass, um, level, uh, four of that, um, of
that assessment, which, uh, gives some assurance that, uh,
that they have reached, uh, a sufficient level
of personal numeracy, um,
to address the primary curriculum.
And that's not to say that there isn't still a need
for ongoing learning,
and that's often, um, at an individual level,
but, uh, it gives some assurance
that there is consistency across the country,
that everybody coming into a te initial teacher
education meets that standard.
So surely the teacher council was doing its job over time
would've been across this issue
before it became such a big issue.
Um, I think that, uh, previously it was up to initial,
it was up to initial teacher educ providers
to set their own, um, and entry tests.
There have been entry tests for literacy
and numerous into teacher education, um, for a long time,
at least since at least 2019, since the new, um, uh,
qualifications were designed.
So, uh, yeah, it's, this is not, um, something
that has been, uh, ignored by the teaching council
or by initial teacher educators.
All right. Thank you very much, Jay.
Thank you for your time, uh,
and participation in this process.
We appreciate it. I try, we need to move on to our break.
Um, so if we could clear the room, uh, we'll be back
with all the things.
Katie is just, um, finishing her motherly duty.
Um, so it's good euphemism there, Mr. Chi.
And, um, inviting, careful,
that's a hole you don't wanna go down.
So we can agree that bill's a dog mm-hmm.
Based on, based on the submissions that Right. Okay.
So we've got Sashi
Christopher,
she is just literally about start.
Okay. Make she all right. Okay.
Introduce them. I love, um,
we'll just give everyone a moment to settle,
but, uh, introduce, we have, uh, Sohi New Zealand,
um, her Yasu.
Thank you. Thank you. Wonderful.
We have 10 minutes with you today.
That includes time for questions.
Time is yours to use as you wish. Thank you very much.
Well, thank you very much.
Well, thank you very much for granting me this opportunity
to make an oral submission.
I, uh, previously submitted a written statement, uh,
dated January 14th, 2026.
Uh, today, however, I have received a message from Mr.
ROI Ohashi, uh, the founder
and president of the private tertiary institution that I,
uh, am employed, uh, which formed the basis for
that written submission.
Accordingly, I would like to Read the following.
Uh, as an addendum
to the previously submitted document, uh, Mr.
Uh, Christopher Collins, our, uh, president Academic is, uh,
with me online today.
Uh, and, uh, he'll be happy
to answer your questions if you have any
after my reading the letter from Mr.
Ohashi. Now, uh,
first introduction.
Uh, my name Ishi Rashi, O Hashi.
I serve as the president of Soshi Gaku
and New Zealand Incorporated,
operating under the trade name IPU New Zealand.
Uh, this institution was established in Palmerston North on
third May, 1990,
and was originally named International Pacific College,
or I-P-C-I-P-U.
New Zealand delivers the master of global business, uh, MGB,
the Bachelor of Contemporary International Studies, BCIS,
New Zealand Diplomas in Business and Tourism Travel,
and English Language Studies Programs.
At the same time, I am the Chancellor of the Kuan Group,
a Japan based educational corporation.
The group provides education, uh,
ranging from early childhood to university institutions
and operates throughout Japan as well as in New Zealand,
Vietnam, and the United States.
Currently, approximately, uh,
25,000 students are enrolled across its affiliated
institutions and following the establishment
of IPU New Zealand in 1990
IPU Japan International Pacific University was founded in
two 2007 and IPU Tokyo
International Plastic University.
Tokyo opened in 2025,
and we are aiming to open IPU Osaka
and IPU Edo in coming years.
At present, uh,
New Zealand government is deliberating the education
and training system Reform amendment Bill.
I believe this is a commendable initiative.
Your are continued efforts
to proactively address contemporary challenges
while setting donation's directions from a long-term
perspective, whether in education and training
or other fields serve as a model, uh, for other countries.
I sincerely hope that you will continue
to uphold this approach.
In regard to the current amendment Bill, uh,
we have already submitted a written opinion stating that
that designation university should be permitted not only
for public universities,
but also institutions such as private,
tertiary institution providers, uh, uh,
private tertiary education providers like ourselves,
and that doing so, uh, would serve
New Zealand's national interests.
At this moment, two things come vividly to my mind.
First, the path that led to the establishment
of our institution as New Zealand's first private tertiary
education provider on third May, 1990
and second, how New Zealand society has grown
and evolved since that time.
In the late 1990s,
I witnessed many young Japanese people attempt
to study abroad only to return home
with their dreams shattered due to language
and cultural barriers, seeking a university
where both domestic
and international students could receive attentive,
individualized support.
I traveled to various countries
in 1987 in Honolulu,
I launched the International Pacific University Grand
Scheme, an initiative that envisioned a consortium
of campuses across Pacific Green countries,
enabling students to move
between campuses while earning the degrees
and developing into truly global seasons.
Then in 1988, here in Palmerston, north in New Zealand,
the then mayor expressed strong support for this vision.
This encouragement led us to develop the our culture.
He, our culture hills then vast green pasture land for sheep
and established in National Pacific College.
However, in 1989,
the construction was temporarily halted at the instruction
of the New Zealand government at the time.
The reason given was that there are no, uh,
private tertiary institutions, uh,
private education institution in the history of New Zealand.
I persisted in negotiations as a result, uh,
much like today, I was granted an opportunity
to present my views before the New Zealand Parliament.
I asked my brother-in-law
who was working in Auckland at the time,
to attend on my behalf.
After submission, I asked him, how did it go?
He replied, they applaud it.
And following that construction resumed,
and on third May, 1990,
international Pacific College officially opened in the
presence of S Reefs, the 15th Governor General
of New Zealand, together with 69 Japanese students
of the inaugural class in the families
behind this major turning point in education, history,
la large scale reforms
by the New Zealand government since the late 1980s, thanks
to the decisive deductions
and implementation by successful governments,
New Zealand has as of 2026, become one
of the world's most attractive destinations
for international students.
Reflecting on the fact that our institution
with a pioneer in this journey,
I feel deeply gratitude towards New Zealand
and at the same time a profound sense of responsibility
and a purpose in making this proposal now present
for the country's continued development.
As previously stated in our submission, the view
that a title university should be available not only
to public universities,
but also private national institutions like ours,
and that this would serve New Zealand national interest
is based on the observation
that New Zealand's effective limitation
of the term university to public institutions.
It's highly unusual by international,
international standards.
A search for the term university shows
that Australia has 44 universities, the uk uh,
166 Japan 787,
and the US 3,931.
By contrast, New Zealand has only eight.
At first glance, this appears
to be an extremely small number.
If this limitation is coding New Zealand
to miss opportunities
to attract more international students,
that could indeed be regrettable.
Some may argue that New Zealand is a small country
with population of 5.3 million,
so eight universities are sufficient.
However, considering the population figures 27.4 million in
Australia, 69.3 million in the uk,
123 million in Japan,
and 340, uh, 0.1 million in us.
In the us the ratio of people per university
is approximately, uh, 620 K in Australia, uh,
420 K in the uk, 160 K in Japan,
87 K in the United States,
and 660 K in New Zealand.
In the light of this, can it be truly said
that New Zealand has a sufficient number of universities.
It is well known that international litigation is a
critically important export industry for New Zealand.
Mm. According to the set of statistics,
revenue from international education amounts to
61.9 billion New Zealand dollars in Australia,
74.5 billion New Zealand dollars in the uk,
3.8 billion Zealand dollars in Japan,
74.4 billion New Zealand dollars in the United States
and New Zealand, uh, $4.5 million
when divided by population.
This request to per eita international education revenue of,
uh, 2000, uh, 259 New Zealand dollars in Australia,
1075, uh, New Zealand dollars in the uk, $30,
uh, 30 New Zealand dollars in Japan, 200, uh,
19 New Zealand dollars in the US
and a remarkable 8,491
New Zealand dollars in New Zealand.
This demonstrates how just significant the, the impactful
inter education is to the New Zealand economy.
If, however, restricting the use
of the title university solely
to public university is limiting the economic
and by extension, social
and cultural benefits of inter education,
then the opportunity cost is substantial.
We have used all the time we have with you, uh,
this afternoon, but thank you very much
and just to acknowledge you Chris Collins,
it's nice to see you again.
Um, thank you very much for your detailed submission.
We do appreciate it and know that we have, um, read that and
because we don't have time for questions, uh,
isn't a reflection, um, of our lack of interest
or anything otherwise understand.
So thank you very much. Thank you very
Much for the opportunity.
Right. We move on now to
early Childhood New Zealand in person.
Thank you. Uh, we have
wonderful 10 minutes with you.
Uh, that includes time for questions
as you know from sitting through.
And please take the time now.
Ko, um, called Kathy Wolf, uh,
chief Executive of Omaha.
On my left is Dr. Ian Mary, who is our Director of Teaching
and Learning, and I'm my right is Dr.
Tui Summers, who's our academic quality leader,
is 63 years young.
Um, we are a membership based organization
and we currently have about 3000, um,
EC members drawn from diverse range of community based,
privately owned kindergarten and home-based services.
We advocate for quality early childhood education,
qualified teachers,
and keeping children at percent of decision making.
We are also a private training station, over 40 years
of experience in teach education offering
and, um, field-based initial teacher education in early
childhood and primary school.
We have 12 qualifications from diploma to post grade,
and four of those are initial teacher
education qualifications.
Te Omaha is an influential leader in shaping
today's teaching profession.
We have a unique role in the sector
spanning early childhood, primary and tertiary education.
This gives us a unique perspective,
which we hope helps inform your decision
and your consideration
of the education training system Reform amendment.
Bill, thank you for the opportunity to meet
with the committee today, and we take our full submission.
As real as you've heard from US sector colleagues this
morning, we too strongly oppose the amendments of this bill.
We will focus on our strong disagreement
of shifting core initial teach education functions from the
Teaching Council to the Ministry of Education.
And we believe the ball risks weakening both the teaching
profession and outcomes for children.
First and foremost, a teacher.
A teacher is a teacher, regardless of which part
of the profession you teach in early childhood, primary
or secretary, some key points from our submission, we
reiterate that the bill provides no evidence
that the current system is broken,
nor that the proposed changes will improve it.
We support strong sector engagement
and efforts to strengthen it induction,
ongoing professional development
and mentoring by not splitting these key functions across
multiple agencies, despite the government's commitment
to reducing bureaucracy.
This proposed bill would increase complexity
by adding the Ministry of Education to processes
and potentially arrow into the mix already handled
by the teaching council and NZQA.
Compliance and customs are already significant in adding
another agency, potentially risks providers
withdrawing from offering RTE
worsening existing teaching shortages.
RTE covers early childhood, primary and secondary,
and all have to comply to the same standards.
This proposal risks creating tiers across the RTE.
There are concerns about the ministry's capability
and capacity being well resourced
to take on these functions.
While the teaching council is, are really well paced
to deliver and strengthened, required
shifting responsibilities to the Ministry
of Education would create further duplication,
increased costs, unclear about the funding use
and contradict goals of reduced expenditure and bureaucracy.
Ministerial control of the professional standards is
inconsistent with other professions in risk politicizing ITE
standards and regulations.
The teaching council's independence
and profession model are vital engagement
and decisions should remain
by the profession for the profession.
We urge the committee to keep core it t functions
with within the teaching council,
strengthen the current systems
and standards by resourcing the teaching council rather than
replacing and or removing them.
Protect the independence and the manner of the profession.
The teacher voice is critical.
Ensure any reforms uplift rather than destabilize the
education sector and teaching profession.
We emphasize that teaching is critical
to our country's future.
Any changes must reflect deep sector understanding
and long-term thinking for the benefit of tamari
and the teaching profession.
Well Done. Wonderful.
Thank you very much, uh, for allowing time for questions.
We have a question first from Mark Zuna.
Thank you so much. Cheer. Thank you so much for coming.
Um, I want to focus on the ITE part, uh, of your submission.
'cause one of the things we have seen
and, uh, the world, the concerning trend is changes to ITE
and particularly taking out, um,
the teaching council are moving to MOE
and the way that ites could be approved could also open
itself up to subpar ITE programs, which then would lead to
risk to children in particular, as we starting
to see quite evidently in Australia.
I wanted to check with you in terms of
what then would be the broader consequence of
that happening, and can you see that it would then lead
to it, for example, being weakened and then yeah.
The consequence of, uh,
a weakened IT TE program. Correct. Do
You wanna take that too? Mm, sure.
Kyoto Lawrence, that's a very good point.
As we've seen in Australia,
early childhood is increasingly at risk
of being de professionalized,
and there has been an increase in the abuse of tamari
and ECE and as Kathy has alluded to, the
destabilization of ITE is a real factor
in relation to this bill.
We currently work with NZQA
and New Zealand Teaching Council, uh,
that is fairly onerous from a bureaucracy perspective.
This would mean that we would be working
across MOE New Zealand Teaching Council
and, um, NZQA.
Thank you. So as you can hear, working across three
government agencies would increase the bureaucracy.
What of course, would risk the outcomes
for TAMARI here in terms
of those standards sitting in a different agency to
where the approval of the IT program sits.
So we definitely endorse that this would not be a positive,
um, outcome for Tamari and for whanau, hapu and iwi.
Mm-hmm.
For a supplementary question,
just a supplementary on something else,
and it's also related to IT,
and the way that the professionalization of EC teachers work
and the trends that we're seeing in Australia is, you know,
you mentioned in terms of also some concerns around
how the director of regulation is going to work
and moving that function from MOE into eero.
One of the other worrying trends we have is to see that, um,
in order to save on cost for lot
of the private ECS in Australia, they're employing more
and more attempts, which may not even have an initial
teacher or teacher qualification.
Do you also see that being a significant, significant risk
to the housing and safety of C Key?
If we're heading into shifting it from teaching council
to MOE
and then shifting the oversight from MOE
to EI,
I think your point's a very good one in terms
of the fragmentation
and potential destabilization of ITE
and that increasingly we are seeing the aspects of ITE
that have previously resided with a professional body,
the New Zealand Teaching Council, that that is being, uh,
separated in a way that risks the quality of our teachers
and also in a way that risks outcomes for tamari,
particularly as you've alluded to, when we consider, um,
standards of teaching
and the research that shows that qualified teachers,
particularly from a three year level seven degree program
and also graduate diploma program, actually,
the research has shown that
that improves outcomes if tamari are with teachers
who have those qualifications, um, we know
that there's also legislation separate from this bill
that's being looked at in relation to reducing standards
for ITU, and that in combination
with this bill raises grade concerns for us
as an organization and for outcomes for tamari.
Currently, one of the key strengths for ITE
and the teaching profession in New Zealand is
that all our teachers have to abide
by the same standards in the same code.
So whether they teach an EC primary
or secondary, they all have to abide by the same standards,
and that is very unique to our, to our country.
And a question from Carl bat.
Thanks very much, chair.
Um, thanks for your submission this morning.
ECE is certainly important, uh, to our family. Mm-hmm.
Um, in your submission, talk about the establishment
of the New Zealand school property agency
and a concern that this will mean that ECE get lost among,
uh, the focus on all schooling in New Zealand.
That struck me as interesting given at the moment,
it's just part of the whole ministry
and actually having the agency,
which then is focusing specifically on property, um,
could have the re the opposite effect,
which is actually more of a focus, um, on the property needs
of, of ECE on Crown land across the country.
Yeah. Uh, interested in your comment on that?
So, um, yeah, you're quite right, Cole.
Thank you for that question. So in some instances,
your early childhood services on Crown, um, agency land, so
that will definitely affect being, you know, how the, how
that will, um, how that is going to have the relationship
with the, with everything within the ministry.
But there's also early childhood services
that are in their own spaces
and, you know, they've got those leases costs as well,
so they just as impacted in those shifts in the property.
Yeah,
Right. Thank you very much.
Appreciate your time, uh, coming
to contribute to this process.
Um, we will now move on to our submitters. Thank you.
Uh, we now have education all, um, we have Jesse again, um,
and as well Trish Grant.
Um, Dr. Marie Kirk joining us.
We have 10 minutes for your organization, just so you know
how this roll, so over to you,
Or NCDI or, or education for all.
Um, education for All is a collaboration of disabled persons
and inclusive education organizations
and educators, researchers, parents, teachers, academics
involved and inclusive education, all committed
to ensuring all disabled students are well educated
in an inclusive education system.
Education fraud opposes the education
and training system reform bill in its current form,
EFA member, Dr. Marie Kirk, to my left of the Bay
of C Down Syndrome Association will begin followed
by Trish Grant, IHC inclusive education lead,
and then myself, Jesse Moss, N-Z-D-I-E-F-A, representative
Kia Marie Kiata.
Um, Dr. Marie Kirk, I wrote the theory of wellbeing
for children, young people with a disability,
and also the only indicated framework for children
with a disability internationally following
EFAs submission.
This oral statement adds a system design
and EV evidence perspective from national inclusive
professional learning, development delivery, highlighting
how data gaps, governance settings,
and compliance focused reforms undermined disabled learners
rights to full curriculum access and belonging.
Taken together the experiences of Maori Pacifica learners
disabled children, and those in rural
and social economically constrained communities show New
Zealand's education Challenges are not a failure
of aspiration.
They're a failure of system design.
The learners and their families consistently hold high
aspirations for learning participation
and future opportunity.
Research evidence shows that in New Zealand,
Connor instead encounter systems
that are too often prioritized, compliance criteria
for educational funding, lack of trained staff, lack
of quality, educational resources,
and narrow definitions of success over inclusion,
participation and long-term capability.
This disconnect between aspiration
and system response is critical to understanding
why inequities persist.
New Zealand has to come as one
of the most diverse child populations in the OECD.
Education is the largest
and most universal social institutions of childhood,
and with that comes responsibility.
International evidence is clear systems serving diverse
populations succeed when they invest in adult capability,
relational practice, and local problem solving.
They're less effective when they respond to complexity
by centralizing authority, narrowing flexibility,
and standardizing compliance.
We are not, we also know from New Zealand
and OEC evidence that bullying poor wellbeing
and lack of student voice remain persistent issues.
These are not peripheral concerns.
They directly affect engagement, attendance, and learning.
A further system weakness is New Zealand's persistent
disability data, which limits practice
and outcome visibility, weaken system stewardship
and contributes to uneven access to inclusive supports
and reliable teaching practice across diverse contexts
where outcomes have been uneven,
the evidence consistently points
to gaps in professional learning, implementation, support,
and system capability, not to a need to reduce child
agency or restrict, restrict access to full curriculum.
Inclusive education is a rights and democracy issue.
Without meaningful consultation, review
or reporting, there is a real risk that processes required
to uphold the United Nations conventions on
the rights of the child.
Conventions on the rights of persons with disabilities
through the democratic process are overstepped.
Consultation with disabled people
and their representative organizations is also explicitly
required under the conventions
of the rights of disabled people.
Article four dash three, including the active involvement
of children with disabilities
and decisions that affect them.
The risk is compounded when increased ministerial influence
allows short term policy shifts
or unconscious bias to override long-term evidence,
community knowledge and children's rights.
Given the demographic reality of our child populations,
our obligations under
meaningful reform must strengthen rights-based,
culturally responsive capability building approaches.
The solution is not to remove power from our communities,
but to build the system's capacity to respond well
and consistently to the children whanau
and society it serves.
I have the, um, all the evidence
and re references here for your mission.
Oh, uh, lovely to be here.
Um, I just want to, I've got some written notes,
but I just thought I'd tell you about, um,
an email I got this morning from a mum who said, Trish,
I'm really worried about what's gonna happen this year.
I'm frightened that, um, the same things
that happened last year will happen this year.
That is her son, who's 10, will be at school for half
of the time, half of the day, half
of the week being stood down on at least
four occasions last year.
He's not sitting in class.
His teacher lacks confidence and capability to teach him.
He's wandering around the school for a lot of the time
with an untrained teacher aide.
When he understands, um, that he's not with other children,
he gets quite distressed.
And some of those distress are
communicated through behaviors.
So he gets stood down in the circle continues.
So my question to you all is, does this bill kind
of create the solutions for this 10-year-old?
I would say that it doesn't.
I think there's cross party agreement
that the system needs a lot of changes.
I support the minister's intent
to change the education system
and using the system's leavers available to her.
However, I, we EFA suggest
that this bill should be paused so that there's more genuine
consultation with experts in the education sector
and from disabled people themselves and whanau.
We think that the bill has some merit,
but it requires strengthening.
Just want to comment on a couple of areas
in inclusive education, um,
the curriculum is the foundation stone for it all.
And so it's what we teach and how we teach it. Now.
The current curriculum changes are not well supported.
The curriculum should respond to all learners.
All learners should be able to learn
and see their own success in the curriculum.
It's a real warning bell in section, uh,
clause nine, two B,
which talks about creating different curricula
for different groups of students.
For me, for EFA, that's max of
poor curriculum design,
and we shouldn't have to add on clip on adjust,
make adaptations an inclusive
curriculum response to all learners.
The other warning bill within this, um, bill is the, um,
the attendance provision.
I think it's section 45.
I mean, whether that's a characteristic
or whatever it is, is it's really great that, um,
this government is serious on attendance
because you cannot learn if you're not there.
Disabled children are queuing up to be there.
They can't get in the door, they can't stay in the door.
Mm-hmm. What we don't know as a system is how many
of those children are restricted from full-time attendance.
We need that data. We need that data to inform a policy
and resourcing framework that gives disabled students
what they need to learn
and gives schools what they need
to do their best work.
And most professionals, most principles are really intent in
that professional endeavor
and need a data driven, a data informed policy
and resourcing framework to do so.
So, you know,
generally from an education perspective, this needs more work.
It needs more consultation, more voices need
to go into the bill, but we support the minister's intent
to improve the education system. So thank you.
Thank you and appreciate your participation in, in,
uh, contribution to this process.
We don't have time for questions. That's okay.
Uh, very comprehensive submission
and the information's up course.
So thank you. Uh, we'll move now to our final submitters
who are all with us.
Uh, so our next submitter is Barbara Karin.
Barbara, we have five minutes with you.
Thank you. Time is yours.
Uh, Ko
thank you for the opportunity
to submit on this consequential bill.
I'd like to acknowledge those submitters
before me who've made strong points about the risks inherent
to this piece of legislation.
While my submission was largely focused on the risks giving
the Minister of education broad power
to change the curriculum, I'd like to make the point
that there's much in this bill that challenges diminishes
or removes the professional standing
of teachers and principals.
Mm-hmm. Like the presenter earlier
who started her teaching in the uk, I see ominous echoes
of harmful policy from the United States.
My home country infecting our education system.
This devaluation of education will increase,
increase the existing level of frustration in my profession,
and could well leave to even more people leaving the
profession or leaving the country to teach elsewhere.
Unfilled positions in school impact more
than teachers and principals.
They impact communities, parents,
and of course, mostly students.
In my 20 plus years of teaching in roa,
I've seen multiple changes
and often felt like a tennis ball
getting batted back and forth.
I think the select committee needs to realize
that educators now feel like that ball is being where
that ball being thwacked away off the court
as having no expertise or value to the system.
I strongly urge this committee to listen more
to those consider education a calling, a profession,
and a public good and less to those
who refer to it as a business.
And please decide not
to progress this legislation any further.
I welcome your questions or comments.
Thank you very much. Bab,
we have a question from Lawrence.
Lawrence. Thank you. Um, ki Barb, uh, just my,
my first question is, you know,
your submission talks a lot about the curriculum,
but I want you just, if you wouldn't mind elaborating on,
how do you think the changes to the curriculum
or the ability for the minister
to make a decision on the curriculum would
affect Alcon students?
Sure. Can I give a a, a really small example?
Um, but know that this is one small piece
that's echoed throughout the, the curriculum.
Um, in 2024, you learned about angles.
At year seven and eight, we had a change of the curriculum.
All of a sudden, at year five, you had to be able
to identify types of angles and create them
and measure them with a protractor at year six.
Now, of course, my year sixes had never done this
because the curriculum changed
and they now needed to know something
that they didn't already know,
and we're supposed to only teach the year level.
Of course, I didn't do that.
I went back and taught them what they needed to know in 2026
year fours who've never had the two angles
before, now need to estimate them year fives, who
as year fours didn't learn anything about angles, now need
to construct them and understand and identify them.
And year sixes need to be able to find unknown angles.
All they've done in the past is just identify them.
How are those children ever gonna feel like they're making
progress or succeeding as every time the curriculum changes,
something changes, and they don't know what they need
to know to learn what they're
supposed to know at that year level. Thank
You, Bob. We've got
Ametri question from
Carl Bates.
Thanks, Barbara. Uh, and thanks for the work
and the things that you do in your classroom, like
with the games, uh, that you referenced in your submission.
But haven't you just highlighted exactly why we need
to be driving forward hard
with improvement in the curriculum so that New Zealand
students, New Zealand young people know what they need
to know to go into life.
But shouldn't that be the same thing two years in a row,
as in a year five doesn't need to learn something different
because they're year five in 2026, not a year five in 2025.
But I was referring, I, I've gotta tell you, I'm,
I'm to the things that you said, uh,
students haven't learned last year,
and so they can't go on to the next thing this year.
Uh, and there needs to be,
and thank you for doing it, that extra work to get them up
to being able to go forward with the curriculum, uh,
learning those angles that they need
to know to go on to life.
So, you know, sometimes, but here's, don't you think we need
to push through and make it happen
Here? The reason they
didn't know what they needed to know,
it wasn't in the curriculum previously.
Exactly. So, so here's, here's my thing.
I learned about vertical angles as a year 10,
and somehow I managed to get not only a bachelor's
and a master's degree, despite not knowing about vertical
angles when I was 11 years old.
So, great. I think that there are,
there's a difference between driving forward
and changing constantly so
that you never have solid ground underneath you.
How am I supposed to tell my parents
of my students whether the children have made progress when
what I'm measuring against them could change?
Because the minister read a different book
and wrote another curriculum.
Thank you very much, Barbara.
We do appreciate your contribution to this.
Uh, something that gets the committee engaged is a good
submission, so we appreciate it.
Thank you. We need to move on now to Claire Amos, who's
with us on Zoom as well.
Claire, we have five minutes with you. Time is yours. Thank
Kia, IT and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Claire Amos, I'm a secondary principal
and I'm here both as a system leader
and as someone who works every day with young people
and teachers who care deeply about their learning.
I wanna be very clear at the outset.
I'm not opposed to improvement, to accountability,
or to a strong and coherent education system.
We all want that,
but I am deeply concerned
that this bill moves us in the wrong direction,
away from a profession, built on trust, expertise,
and local responsiveness,
and toward a highly centralized compliance driven system
that will ultimately narrow both teaching and learning.
At the heart of this is agency, agency is not a buzzword.
It's the difference between students who comply
and students who are engaged.
It's the difference between teachers who deliver
and teachers who design this bill.
Systemic systematically removes agency from both.
First, it centralizes curriculum control in the hands
of the secretary and the minister, whatever the intention,
the practical effect is
that the curriculum will become something that is done
to schools, not something that is co-constructed
with communities, teachers, and learners.
That is a profound shift away from the spirit
of the New Zealand curriculum,
which is deliberately designed to be flexible, local,
and future focused.
Innovation does not come from central permission,
it comes from professional trust.
Secondly, the bill removes key functions from the teaching
council and places them with the secretary.
This is not a technical change, it is a philosophical one.
It reframes teaching from a self-governing profession
to a workforce managed by the state.
And that should concern everyone in this room.
Strong systems do not weaken professional voice.
They strengthen it.
Thirdly, the bill replaces genuine consultation
with communities with a duty merely to inform them
that is not partnership, that is not ity in action.
And it is certainly not how we build trust in a complex
and diverse community.
But I actually wanna talk mostly about students in my school
and in many schools across our tier.
We see young people thrive when they have the opportunity
to create, to inquire, to solve real problems
and to shape their learning.
Those experiences require teacher judgment, flexibility,
and curriculum space.
A system that becomes more centralized,
more compliance driven
and more risk averse will not produce confident,
creative, adaptable young people.
It will produce a safe, narrow,
standardized experience of learning.
And a world that is changing as fast as ours,
that is not just undesirable, it is dangerous.
This bill may improve system control,
but it does so at the cost of professional trust,
local responsiveness, and teacher and learner agency.
I urge this committee to seriously reconsider the travel of,
um, the direction of travel here.
Because if we design a system that does not trust teachers,
we should not be surprised when it stops
producing powerful learning.
And if we design a system that does not trust young people,
we should not be surprised when they disengage from it.
I urge the select committee
to reject the bill in its current form,
or at the very least, provide provisions that a
transfer professional standards
and code of, um, the teaching council things to the,
um, secretary.
So to remove that provision, um, remove the allowing
of curriculum differentiation by school type
or student grouping.
See, we and community consultation requirements,
the expansion of charter school chains
and the centralization
of property control without genuine school partnership,
any reform of the education system should be co-designed
with the profession grounded in evidence
and aligned with Ang education systems
reflect the kind of society we aspire to be.
This bill is not merely administrative, it is cultural,
and it is ideological.
Once enacted, it affects, will shape schooling for decades.
So I sense we need to proceed
with very real caution. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Claire. We don't have time for questions
with you, but appreciate your
pro participation in this process.
Thank you. And your submission. Thank you very much. Yeah,
Thank you.
Now we move on now to our tier educators collective.
They're appearing via Zoom.
Um, we've got Dr. John O'Neill and Dr. Raywin Eden.
Uh, to both of you, uh, you have 10 minutes.
Time is yours and it includes questions.
Welcome.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to, for us
to be with you and to speak with you today.
Uh, we'll take the submission as read just
to emphasize the key points I suppose
that underline our concerns.
You now view. These are a series
of solutions in search of problems.
Uh, we're not convinced that there's anything there
that requires legislation to, to address it.
The entire bill is characterized by significant ministerial
and agency overreach.
Uh, we're concerned at the consequent loss of participation
and decision rights for parents, education professionals,
and by implication students.
And we're also concerned that there is a serious lack
of evidence to support the proposals.
And with that introduction, we're happy
to take questions. Kilda,
Wonderful question from Lawrence
Now. Cool. Thank
you so much cheer.
And there's plenty of time to ask questions, which is good.
Um, Ola, Wyn, uh, and and Ola.
John, thank you so much for joining us.
Um, I guess my first question is, you know,
looking at your submission
and John you just mentioned in terms of parents
and I suppose kind of for many of you, I guess your members
as both parents and also educators, um, what are some
of the misconceptions that people often have in terms of
being a parent but also feel like an educator,
but also, I guess in this case for this particular bill,
what should parents be concerned about?
Um, I was involved
with the education conversation back in 20 18, 20 19 when
there was a comprehensive survey of parents
and education participants about
what parents wanted from education.
And what they wanted would generally be summarized
as a holistic sense of development.
They want their children to be happy, to be fulfilled,
to develop, um, social skills
and of course to develop academic skills.
The misconception underlying this bill
and several previous decisions by the government have been
that all that's important is the academic side of things.
We have anecdotal evidence amongst our members of, uh,
for example, primary school principals
who have completely transformed their classrooms over the
summer to create three rows of, uh,
ability grouped students to remove all classrooms displays
as they apparently constitute cognitive distraction,
to insist that all classes
progress throughout the school day at exactly the same pace,
all teaching the same things at the same time.
This is an example of, uh, uh, an idea with potential
that we should have more structure in the curriculum being
taken to ridiculous extremes.
And I think the, um, uh, the, the reality is
that parents want a diversity
of things from the schooling system
for their children according to need as the last.
But one presenters summarized very eloquently in terms
of children's rights
and the need for inclusion
of all children And
Documentary. Yeah.
Um, I do have further question. Thank you.
Um, thank you for the response.
And the other thing is another previous speaker,
Clem Amos sort of also touched on this, is some
of the concerns around having a very narrow curriculum
and a very structured curriculum
and how that would prepare our students
and children for ever involving and a, a very dynamic world.
What are you two thoughts around having that strict,
um, curriculum layout
and the ability for students to adapt to, um,
the world and environment around them?
You know, rising AI
and all of the other things that's actually we're,
we're currently grappling with
and how that would mean
for future job opportunities and all of those.
So what, is there any concerns with the changing nature
of the curriculum and how we are preparing our students?
Uh, certainly there are educators.
Collective is, uh, uh, a diverse membership.
But the common element is that we would regard ourselves
as progressive educators.
We have a holistic view of education,
and most of the members have spent their entire careers over
decades in ensuring that each day when children turn up,
they have a rich, immersive experience of education,
knowledge, skills, values, dispositions, all
of which is linked to their life outside, outside school.
Um, the, the risk of the direction
of travel with the current curriculum is
that it's been captured by a narrow group of ideologues
who have, um, a adopted a very narrow view of
what knowledge is.
And they've summarized that as learning the best
that society has produced.
Um, its abstract knowledge.
It will in inevitably mean that children spend larger
and longer amounts of time sitting there absorbing facts
with the spurious notion that
that will help them lead better lives.
Help there needs to be a restoration of balance
and the current direction of travel will never achieve
that kilda.
Thank you. Question from Grant.
Yeah. I'm just curious, up until these last sets
of reforms, do you feel the education system has been
delivering for students well enough in terms
of literacy and numeracy?
The, the analysis grant is that
what's been missing has been an almost complete absence of,
um, systematic structured approaches to literacy.
I think the evidence
that I've seen over the years would dispute
that it would say that most classrooms have
historically adopted mixed methods,
including both whole language
and systematic structured literacy approaches.
By replacing one with the other, you are simply going
to create future problems.
And the evidence base would suggest very strongly from
Dominic Wise's work in the uk, for example, that
what you are likely to do is to, uh,
develop very strong phonic skills at the expense
of all other aspects of, uh, of literacy.
And the same would apply to numeracy
and broader mathematics.
I think that the current a lot of parents
and students today would disagree with you in terms
of the outcomes that they've been actually getting in the
current education system.
I think you are attributing, um, all the challenges
that exist in education to basic
literacy and numeracy.
And again, there's a very strong evidence base
that says there are far many more
variables than those in play.
Certainly by introducing a very, uh, strongly
mandated approach, we'll give government the idea
that it's achieving a solution.
But the reality of what goes on in classrooms is
far more complex.
And I think you'll be surprised at how difficult it is
to enact literacy
and numeracy curricular in the way that you want to,
through the science of learning.
Science of learning is part of the solution.
It's not the entire solution.
Thank you very much, John and Raywin.
Uh, we need to move on now.
We have limited time today,
but thank you for your participation in this process.
We do appreciate it. All right.
We move on to our last submitter for this part of our, um,
meeting ECE reform via Zoom, Michael Bedford,
hopefully online ready to go.
We have 10 minutes with you
and you can take the submission as read.
Michael, if you could just turn your camera on
and your audio, assuming he's accepted.
Cameras. Great. Wonderful.
Michael, 10 minutes is yours. Alright,
Sorry, I just lost my video there. I'll try again. That's
Okay. Okay. Yep. We
can see you in here. You go for it.
Yeah, sorry. Coming in from a hotel room in Vietnam at the
moment, so it's a little bit,
but, um, yeah, so look, um, we have, sorry,
just quick introduction for myself
and EC reform for people not familiar.
So, EC reform was set up as an advocacy group.
Uh, we reformed 2021 to address, um, what I've described
as, um, the systemic failure in the early childhood sector.
So we focused on solutions to governance
and, um, are very disappointed in the fact that, um,
you know, we are seeing a regulatory review that has failed
to address key elements of governance.
However, the proposal for the di
or sorry, the position that's now established
for de director of regulation
for the early childhood sector, we supported that,
but we supported it with a number of proposed amendments.
And those, none of those amendments were included.
But also, as you've noted, none of them were questioned
or challenged in the last presentation that,
that I did this to this committee.
So, you know, um, as we're trying to be, um, uh,
reasonable in the approach here, I know that there's a lot
of things that needed to be considered,
but that role can be critical for the sector.
And so this submission is only about the question
that was raised by the committee as to whether the director
of regulation role should be rolled in
with a director for charter schools.
And in fact, whether you should have the director
of regulation under the Education Review Office
or under the Ministry of Education.
Um, I,
because the move to having the director of regulation
under the Education Review Office would, um,
require another amendment to the ACT that I would see
as an opportunity to say,
please can we more carefully consider what the director
of regulation role is going to involve?
And so at this point, I'm going to say I will, um,
assume that our submission has been read, take that as read.
And I wanna make a plea from the heart
because the thing that distressed us in the proposal
to have the director of regulation role
for early childhood rolled up together with director
of regulation for charter schools is a terrible lack
of understanding of what's going on in the early childhood
sector and has been for years.
We have had a rolling disaster in the sector
for more than a decade.
And just by way of background, as I said, you know,
we're an advocacy group for system change, that
that's needed because
of the terrible conditions children are subjected to
because of the way the system is working.
I have about 35 years experience with the sector.
I would've visited somewhere in the region of seven
to 830 childhood centers.
I know the sector in depth, the conditions.
I have seen places that I didn't wanna
leave, please, could I be three?
Can I stay here? And I have seen places
that have left me in tears
as they do the teachers that work in them.
I'm not given to exaggeration.
This is my carefully considered estimate that every weekday,
thousands to tens of thousands
of children are placed in conditions
that no child should be subjected to.
That is because of our appalling regulations
for ratios space per child,
which constitutes gross overcrowding
and no controls on group size.
In addition to that, we have no systems
to manage issues such as, uh, bullying,
producing high staff turnover.
High staff turnover is incredibly damaging to children
when they are under three years old,
particularly under two years old.
And we are setting ourselves up
for mental health issues down the track.
It's absolutely predictable.
We also have high levels of non-compliance, not reported
by the Ministry of Education,
but I hear so much from early childhood teachers when we
have a 4,020 teacher survey reporting, 11%
of teachers with 11% of respondents reported
that they were regularly working at worse than our already
terrible minimum ratios.
We've got a big problem.
And into that context steps, the director of regulation,
the person who takes on that role
isn't just dealing with education.
And that's one of the biggest fallacies about the sector.
I mean, quite bluntly, no person with a covered brain cells
to rub together is going to put their 1-year-old
into long day non parental care for their education.
You'd be totally stupid
because it's not the way the children
develop for, for the best.
This is childcare.
It's about the care of babies, the care of toddlers.
We have a one to 10 ratio for two year olds.
Can you imagine working with that?
But we've lost the focus on care for children
and quality for life, quality of life for children.
It was, it was hardly there in the processing
of the regulatory review that we've gone
through except in the submissions that pleaded
as I am for focus on that.
So, um, I want to leave room for questions,
but I'm, I'm gonna make a plea.
And again, I'm not wanting to, to be overly negative here.
This is my experience that I have not yet found.
One politician who has spoken up for the con
for the conditions that children run
or against the conditions that are children in to, to
make the case for them
and say, children deserve quality
of life when they're 1-year-old, not grossly overcrowded,
understaffed, noisy, stressed environments.
What does that do to a child of that age?
Who is going to speak up?
Please, if anyone will do so, please talk to us
because we have the solutions for this.
We know what to do about it.
But we need someone who will advocate for children
rather than for businesses.
And we are not anti center
ownership in terms of private ownership.
Some of the best ones are private,
but we are against commercialization using children simply
as a mechanism for profit, which is the dominant element
coming through in the regulatory reforms.
So what I want to say is, in no way should, you know,
no way should we have the director of regulation
for early childhood lumped together
with schools, with charter schools.
It may be reasonable to combine the roles, um, to,
to bring the role over to the Ministry of Educ
to Education Review office
or to take arrow functions
through the childhood sector into the ministry so
that we don't have that duplication of conflict.
We are not entirely sure which would be the best option,
but you have to consider systems
as we identified in the submission.
Anyway, I'll, I think it's probably best to open up
for questions at this point.
Thank you. We have a question, uh, ready
for you from Lawrence Sunan.
Good chair and thank you for that submission. Michael.
Um, can I just, so fundamentally, one of the, the,
the concerns that you've raised
and you are hoping that the director
of regulation would address is sort of the, the lack
of transparency and accountability
that we've been seeing in the e space.
And I guess one of the challenges we have,
and we've heard from other submitters on ECE
that we're gonna have with potentially have with this bill,
I'm not saying it will, um, is
to move ITE into from teaching counts tecans into MOE,
moving the, uh, director
of regulation function from MOE into eero
and some of the shifts that we are currently seeing.
How would that affect what you have in mind in terms
of accountability and transparency
and in terms of, uh, like if
that approach does indeed happen, what needs to be done
to ensure that children's health
and safety at the forefront when these sort
of decisions are being made or these sort of reviews
or oversight are, are happening?
Okay. Um, the first thing we've got to do is to recognize
what the issues are
and, um, what kind of oversight is required.
Um, so there's a couple of,
there's several different issues in here.
So there's for example, um, teacher registration,
teacher training, elements like that, which I'm,
I'm gonna step back from
because I just think with the time available, what I want
to focus on is what the director
of regulation function needs to be able to do.
It needs to be able to gather information, it needs
to get information from parents.
At the moment we have massive holes in information gathering
and that's why we had the amendment proposed to ensure
that the director of regulation can get
information from teachers.
So that means teacher surveys,
but it also means that we need
to connect very clearly into the teaching workforce
and the data available
in relation to the teaching workforce.
We also need, um, other ministry systems such
as the ELI data available to the Director of regulations.
So you need the data gathering systems that has
to be integrated one way or another.
Um, Michael, Michael, we also need to look. Yep.
Oh, sorry. If you could make any final remarks
'cause we've run out of time now.
Okay. Yeah. So that's the point is that you've got
to be able to have the systems integrated
and you have to have a person who has the knowledge
of child wellbeing, um, down to the age of, you know,
under one, in order to be able to do the job properly.
It's not a school context. It's very different.
Thank you very much. And thank you
for your participation in this process.
We appreciate it. Uh, and your submission as well.
Uh, we are gonna move now into private, uh, session. So.